1

Leo Strauss
Aristotle's Ethics

A course offered in the winter and spring of 1968
at Claremont Men's College

Edited by Joseph A. Haydt
Joseph A. Haydt is a J.D. student at the University of Pennsylvania Carey School of Law. His
research examines the reception of Greek and Roman thought in modern (post-Enlightenment)
German literature and philosophy. His publications include “Sokratische Fragen als Streitfragen.
Zur Form der Reflexion bei Lessing und Goethe,” in Praktiken der Provokation, edited by
Magdalena Fricke et al. (Hannover: Wehrhahn Verlag, 2024), 277-83.

With assistance from Aaron Roberts, Sarah Ellison, and Jeremy Bell

Introduction by Ronna Burger
Ronna Burger is Professor of Philosophy, Catherine and Henry J. Gaisman Chair and Director of
Judeo-Christian Studies, Sizeler Professor of Jewish Studies at Tulane University. She is author of
Aristotle’s Dialogue with Socrates: on the Nicomachean Ethics (Chicago, 2008) and numerous
writings on ancient philosophy.

© Estate of Leo Strauss 2025. All Rights Reserved.

6/25

2

3
Table of Contents
Note on the Leo Strauss Transcript Project

i-ii

Note to the Reader

iii

Editorial Headnote

iii

Session 1: Introduction: Ethical foundations of politics (book 1.1)

1

Session 2: The highest good and political art; ancients and moderns
(book 1.1-2)

16

Session 3: Manner of the inquiry; the highest good (book 1.3-4)

34

Session 4: Opinions about the good life (book 1.5-6)

52

Session 5: Happiness as self-sufficient; the work of man (book 1.7)

67

Session 6: Happiness as the highest good; critique by Hobbes, Kant,
Nietzsche (book 1.7-8)

71

Session 7: How happiness comes to be; external goods (book 1, chap. 8-9)

90

Session 8: Happiness in a complete life; the role of fortune (book 1.10-12)

111

Session 9: The human soul; moral vs. intellectual virtue (book 1.13, 2.1)

132

Session 10: The mean vs. excess and deficiency; pleasure and pain
(book 2.2)

154

Session 11: The natural end of man; habituation and pleasure; virtue as a
disposition (book 2.3-5)

175

Session 12: Virtue, aiming at the mean; Hobbes’s critique (book 2.6)

194

Session 13: Involuntary action and compulsion; mixed actions (book 3.1)

218

Session 14: Ignorance and involuntary action; choice as the core of action
(book 3.1-2)

237

Session 15: What is the object of deliberation? Wish; responsibility for
0ur character (book 3.3-5)

259

Session 16: Particular virtues: courage, moderation, liberality; magnanimity
as “crowning ornament (book 4, selections)

278

4

Session 17: Moral virtue and the public happiness; universal justice as
the other peak of moral virtue (book 5.1)

299

Session 18: Universal and particular justice; good man vs. good citizen
(book 5.2)

316

Session 19: Aristotle’s teaching on justice; particular justice, distributive
and commutative (book 5.2-5 )

332

Session 20: What makes a man unjust? Natural right (book 5.5)

352

Session 21: Justice natural and conventional (book 5.6); theoretical and
practical ways of life (book 5.10)

374

Session 22: What is doing injustice and suffering injustice? (book 5.9)

392

Session 23: Equity and justice; suicide (book 5.10-11)

414

Session 24: Prudence; the noble and just (book 6)

434

Session 25: Summary: happiness and virtue, deliberation and choice,
responsibility; the particular virtues: courage and intellectual courage (book 3)

451

i

The Leo Strauss Transcript Project
Leo Strauss is well known as a thinker and writer, but he also had tremendous impact as a
teacher. In the transcripts of his courses one can see Strauss comment on texts, including
many he wrote little or nothing about, and respond generously to student questions and
objections. The transcripts, amounting to more than twice the volume of Strauss’s
published work, add immensely to the material available to scholars and students of
Strauss’s work.
In the early 1950s mimeographed typescripts of student notes of Strauss’s courses were
distributed among his students. In winter 1954, the first recording, of his course on
natural right, was transcribed and distributed to students. Strauss’s colleague Herbert J.
Storing obtained a grant from the Relm Foundation to support the taping and
transcription, which resumed on a regular basis in the winter of 1956 with Strauss’s
course “Historicism and Modern Relativism.” Of the 39 courses Strauss taught at the
University of Chicago from 1958 until his departure in 1968, 34 were recorded and
transcribed. After he retired from Chicago, recording of his courses continued at
Claremont Men’s College in the spring of 1968 and the fall and spring of 1969 (although
the tapes for his last two courses there have not been located), and at St. John’s College
for the four years until his death in October 1973.
The surviving original audio recordings vary widely in quality and completeness, and
after they had been transcribed, the audiotapes were sometimes reused, leaving the audio
record very incomplete. Over time the audiotape deteriorated. Beginning in the late
1990s, Stephen Gregory, then administrator of the University’s John M. Olin Center for
Inquiry into the Theory and Practice of Democracy funded by the John M. Olin
Foundation, initiated digital remastering of the surviving tapes by Craig Harding of
September Media to ensure their preservation, improve their audibility, and make
possible their eventual publication. This project received financial support from the Olin
Center and from the Division of Preservation and Access of the National Endowment for
the Humanities. The remastered audiofiles are available at the Strauss Center website:
https://leostrausscenter.uchicago.edu/courses.
Strauss permitted the taping and transcribing to go forward but did not check the
transcripts or otherwise participate in the project. Accordingly, Strauss’s close associate
and colleague Joseph Cropsey originally put the copyright in his own name, though he
assigned copyright to the Estate of Leo Strauss in 2008. Beginning in 1958 a headnote
was placed at the beginning of each transcript: “This transcription is a written record of
essentially oral material, much of which developed spontaneously in the classroom and
none of which was prepared with publication in mind. The transcription is made available
to a limited number of interested persons, with the understanding that no use will be
made of it that is inconsistent with the private and partly informal origin of the material.
Recipients are emphatically requested not to seek to increase the circulation of the
transcription. This transcription has not been checked, seen, or passed on by the lecturer.”
In 2008, Strauss’s heir, his daughter Jenny Strauss, asked Nathan Tarcov to succeed

ii
Joseph Cropsey as Strauss’s literary executor. They agreed that because of the
widespread circulation of the old, often inaccurate and incomplete transcripts and the
continuing interest in Strauss’s thought and teaching, it would be a service to interested
scholars and students to proceed with publication of the remastered audiofiles and
transcripts. They were encouraged by the fact that Strauss himself signed a contract with
Bantam Books to publish four of the transcripts although in the end none were published.
The University’s Leo Strauss Center, established in 2008, launched a project, presided
over by its director, Nathan Tarcov, and managed by Stephen Gregory, to correct the old
transcripts on the basis of the remastered audiofiles as they became available, transcribe
those audiofiles not previously transcribed, and annotate and edit for readability all the
transcripts including those for which no audiofiles survived. This project was supported
by grants from the Winiarski Family Foundation, Mr. Richard S. Shiffrin and Mrs.
Barbara Z. Schiffrin, Earhart Foundation, and the Hertog Foundation, and contributions
from numerous other donors. The Strauss Center was ably assisted in its fundraising
efforts by Nina Botting-Herbst and Patrick McCusker of the Office of the Dean of the
Division of the Social Sciences at the University.
Senior scholars familiar with both Strauss’s work and the texts he taught were
commissioned as editors, with preliminary work done in most cases by student editorial
assistants. The goal in editing the transcripts has been to preserve Strauss’s original
words as much as possible while making the transcripts easier to read. Strauss’s impact
(and indeed his charm) as a teacher is revealed in the sometimes informal character of his
remarks. Readers should make allowance for the oral character of the transcripts. There
are careless phrases, slips of the tongue, repetitions, and possible mistranscriptions.
However enlightening the transcripts are, they cannot be regarded as the equivalent of
works that Strauss himself wrote for publication.
Nathan Tarcov, Editor-in-Chief
Gayle McKeen, Managing Editor
August 2014

iii
Note to the Reader
Ronna Burger, Tulane University
This is the second course Strauss offered on Aristotle’s Ethics. The first was in spring
1963 in the Political Science Department of University of Chicago. Strauss’s fundamental
approach is common to both courses, although distinct issues naturally arise, especially in
response to students’ concerns, while the most striking difference is the material treated.
In contrast with the earlier course, which covers in order the ten books of the
Nicomachean Ethics, more than a third of the lectures in the 1968 course are devoted to
the theme of happiness in book 1, a few to moral virtue in the opening chapters of book 2
and the question of responsibility in the first half of book 3, most of the rest to the
examination of justice in book 5. When in the fourteenth session Strauss reaches the issue
of deliberation, he remarks at the end that they won’t have time to discuss the final
section of book 3, but “we have no one with a whip behind us who tells us how much of
the Ethics to read or not.” For comments on central themes in Strauss’s reading of
Aristotle’s Ethics, see the introduction to his 1963 course.

Editorial Headnote
This course was taught in seminar form: Strauss began class with general remarks; a
student then read aloud portions of the text, followed by Strauss’s comments and
reponses to student questions and comments. The texts used in the course were Aristotle,
Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Sir David Ross (London: Oxford Universitiy Press, 1954),
and Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. H. Rackham (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1934). When the text was read aloud in class, this transcript records the
words as they appear in the texts. Original spelling has been retained, and citations are
included.
We do not have a class roster with the names of students who attended the class; hence
the spelling of some student names may be inaccurate.
The course met for 25 sessions. Audiofiles have survived for all except sessions 1 and 24.
Session 5 was only partially recorded. The transcripts of sessions 2–23 and session 25 are
based upon the remastered audiofiles; the transcripts of sessions 1 and 24 are based on
the original transcript, made by persons unknown to us.
This transcript was edited by Joseph A. Haydt, with assistance from Aaron Roberts,
Sarah Ellison, and Jeremy Bell. The introduction was written by Ronna Burger.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

1

Session 1: February 12, 1968i
Leo Strauss: The subject of this course has been called “The Ethical Foundations of
Politics.” The manner of treatment is that we will study together Aristotle’s Nicomachean
Ethics in order to learn something from him about it. Now why do we choose this subject
and this manner of treatment?
In the first place, this is a serious issue which is indicated by the expression “the ethical
foundations of politics.” Let us not take anything for granted. In the present-day
discussions about the war in Vietnam, you hear arguments both for and against the war
on grounds of expediency. But you hear also arguments for or against the war on grounds
of morality or immorality, justice or injustice as well. This would seem to show that there
is an issue here: the ethical foundations of politics. The general question of course has
nothing to do with the war in Vietnam in particular but means: must politics have an
ethical foundation, or not? It is by no means evident that it must 1.
In order to avoid entanglements in present-day controversy, I will read to you a few
sentences about a foreign statesman (a German statesman, as a matter of fact) called
Bismarck. I read from a book about him by an historian called Eyck, not to be mistaken
with the former president: “certainly the most passionate advocate of Prussian
ascendancy, after an interview with Bismarck in the last days before the war [of ’66—
LS] he confessed that he was very much impressed by Bismarck’s personality, but he
added: ‘of the moral powers in the world he has not the slightest notion!’”ii Of the same
Bismarck an English journal, The Spectator, wrote: “The man’s policy is detestable, but
his objects are great, his plans adequate and his ability marvelous.” iii So I think that is an
illustration among many illustrations which one could give of the questions with which
we are concerned. The question applies most vividly to foreign affairs, but 2 [it applies] to
domestic affairs as well.
There are two fundamental alternatives which are popularly known, the one being
Machiavellianism, which can be said to be the view that there are no moral foundations
of politics; and [the other], the anti-Machiavellian view. In this case, we do not have a
single name as in the case of Machiavelli. There is no such classic of the good view. But
Thomas Paine in this country and Kant in Germany would perhaps be the most famous
representatives of the anti-Machiavellian view in modern times. Now the Machiavellians
of today, which you may even find on campuses, are likely to reject
anti-Machiavellianism as an ideology, to say that the only nonideological approach is of
course to forget about such nonsense as morality. But this is not a very good argument,
because the same would be true of Machiavellianism, namely, that it too is an ideology,
the reason being that Machiavellianism asserts in fact: “Don’t pay any attention to
morality,” which is a negative ought. But according to the view now prevailing, all
oughts, positive or negative, cannot be rationally established but have the character of
value judgments. So we cannot leave it at this view, that anti-Machiavellianism is an
ideology.

i

The audio recording of this first session did not survive. The text is taken from the original
transcript.
ii
Strauss quotes from Erich Eyck, Bismarck and the German Empire (London: Allen & Unwin,
1950). The interviewer referred to in this passage is Heinrich von Treitschke.
iii
Quoted in Eyck, Bismarck, 118.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

2

I come to a more serious question. Why do we speak of ethical foundations of politics?
The term is of Greek origin and occurs, in a way, for the first time in Aristotle. The
footnotes I will give later. But it is not necessary to speak of what we have in mind as
“quote ethical unquote,” for that implies a certain interpretation of a phenomenon that
need not be interpreted in this manner. I read to you a passage from the Old Testament,
Prophet Micah, chapter 6, verse 8: “The Lord has shown thee, O man, what is good: and
what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justice, and love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God?” You see here there is no word which could possibly be translated by
“ethical.” The word which is most important here is the word “good,” and that of course
exists in all languages, including the Greek language. But between good and ethical there
is a difference, and we will try to understand it.
In order to find out what is implied when we speak of ethics, we shall study the earliest
work entitled “Ethics” available to us, namely, Aristotle’s Ethics. When the Greek
language migrated to Rome some centuries after Aristotle, the word “ethical” became
translated by “moral.” [The] Romans did not have an exact word for what the Greeks
called ethos. Their word for ethos was a plural, mores, which as you know is still used.
But ethics and morals have the same meaning. And you must not be misled by
present-day American usage, by which a woman of easy manners would probably be
called immoral by old-fashioned people, while a pharmacist who is not very correct
would probably be called not immoral but unethical. It is worth considering how this
difference between ethical and moral emerged, but it is of no interest except to say that it
is uninteresting.
Now I have already implicitly answered the question with which I started: why do we
treat our theme by studying Aristotle’s Ethics? We study it not as historians or
antiquarians, or merely because we would like to know something about another culture
which is so famous, the Greek culture, but we do it for a serious reason, for a respectable
reason. We would like to acquire some clarity, within the limits possible in such a short
course, about our own premises, our own hidden presuppositions. More simply stated,
inquiry of the kind which we have in mind is an attempt to replace opinion about
important matters 3 [with] knowledge about them. In order to do this in a clean and clear
manner, we have to know in the first place what our opinions are. It is not so simple that
some pollster, by just asking [for] them could elicit them. Sometimes we have to make a
genuine effort to discover our opinions. But when we are engaged in that process, we see
very often that our opinions are not just our opinions or those of Mr. X or Y, and not
merely of him and his peers, social or otherwise, but that they are opinions inherited from
the past. So in order to clarify these opinions you would have to go back to the past epoch
when these opinions were originally founded, created, or formulated, or whichever word
you prefer. Therefore, as is shown by the mere words “ethical” and “moral,” which are
not from today or yesterday but go back to centuries ago, we cannot clear up their
meaning, we cannot reach clarity about our own self without going back, for instance, to
Aristotle. Especially in our case to Aristotle.
Now there was a modern philosopher who stated this view in an unusually clear manner,
and that was Hegel, in the preface to his book called The Phenomenology of the Mind. I
will read to you.
“The manner of study in ancient times is distinct from that of modern times, in that the
former consisted in the veritable training and perfecting of the natural consciousness.
[“Natural” means untrained here.—LS] Trying its powers at each part of its life severally,
and philosophizing about everything it came across, the natural consciousness [the
prephilosophic consciousness, you might say—LS] transformed itself into a universality
of abstract understanding, which was active in every matter and in every respect. In

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

3

modern times, however, the individual finds the abstract form [the concept—LS] ready
made.”iv
In modern times, from the very beginning of modernity, the concepts, the fundamental
concepts were ready-made. Their making, their genesis, was no longer a matter of
interest. Everyone knew there was such a thing as nature, for example; why should we
worry about that? 4 Aristotle, who was a great authority up to this point, made some gross
blunders in this respect which must be corrected. But that there is such a thing as nature
goes without saying. In other words, one of the greatest discoveries or inventions that the
human mind [had] ever made, the discovery or invention of nature, was disregarded as
irrelevant, and immense problems were thus swept under the rug.
Now Hegel makes here a remark, as you have seen, about the difference between modern
times and ancient times, and a certain superiority of ancient times. The ancient
philosophers began from scratch, at the beginning. Not at the beginning of human
thought—there was5 human thought before philosophy—but at the beginnings of
philosophic thought. Modern philosophy, however technical and sophisticated it may
claim to be, is the heir to the tremendous work done in the philosophy of antiquity. These
modern achievements, however great they may be, have a peculiarly derivative character
compared with the primary character of classical thought.
We would see in reading Aristotle’s Ethics, and would see perhaps more clearly from
reading his Politics, that the amount of technical terms [is smaller than that] found in any
modern book. And Aristotle is already rather late in Greek philosophy, after Plato and
others. I think it is necessary as a first step, if we want to understand a line of Aristotle, to
have some notion (superficial, yes, but also more or less concrete) of this enormous
difference between the modern and the ancients.
At the end of the seventeenth century there was a famous controversy in Western Europe,
in France and England in particular, called the quarrel between the ancients and the
moderns. That was partly a very silly quarrel, as all such quarrels are when they come
into the wrong hands, if I may say so. But you must not forget one great book in the
English language, the work of Jonathan Swift which shows that it can also fall into the
right hands.v And the seeming issue is whether Corneille or Racine, or Dryden, for that
matter, is as good a tragic poet or perhaps even a better tragic poet than Sophocles or
Euripides. This is a part of the story; but the interesting part of it was of course not
dramatic or epic poetry but philosophy, or what at that time was the same thing:
[physics]. Is Aristotle’s physics the right teaching or is the Cartesian–Newtonian physics?
A radical, fundamental difference between two ways of looking at all things.
Now if we do not know of this, if we do not reflect on this from the very beginning, we
will read Aristotle with our modern language, and that is inevitable, especially for those
who are unable to turn from the translations to the original, because the translators are of
iv

See G.W.F. Hegel, The Phenomenology of Mind, trans. J. B. Baillie, 2nd ed. (London: George
Allen & Unwin; New York: Humanities Press, 1949), 94. Strauss apparently reads from but
freely adapts Baillie’s translation of this passage, which runs: “The manner of study in ancient
times is distinct from that of the modern world, in that the former consisted in the cultivation and
perfecting of the natural mind. Testing life carefully at all points, philosophizing about everything
it came across, the former created an experience permeated through and through by universals. In
modern times, however, an individual finds the abstract form ready made.”
v
See Jonathan Swift, “The Battle of the Books,” published in the first edition of A Tale of a Tub
(1704).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

4

course modern men, naturally, and they think it is their first duty to make Aristotle
intelligible to modern readers immediately. That is not so simple, that they should make
him intelligible to modern readers. This requires some precautionary measures which
they do not usually take.
Now I begin in a bureaucratic manner, which I find is sometimes very good to gain
provisional clarity. We shall start by contrasting the ancient, in particular the Aristotelian
division of philosophy with the one prevailing today. And then we will begin to
understand what we are studying. Aristotle’s division of philosophy is this: there is first a
preamble or prelude, called logic. Then there are two parts: one is called theoretical
sciences, and the other is called practical sciences. The theoretical sciences are divided
into three, called mathematics, physics, and let us call the third theology—the more
common traditional name was metaphysics. And [the] practical sciences [are] ethics,
economics, and politics. Now it is [also] important to know this6 for the reason that we
are trying to understand Aristotle’s Ethics, and we must know what precisely is the place
which it occupies within the whole of Aristotle’s thought. We get a notion from this: it is
the first of the practical sciences. The general view of Aristotle, I would like to underline
right away, is that the theoretical sciences are higher in rank than the practical sciences.
This is especially true of the highest of the theoretical sciences, physics and metaphysics,
that they are much higher in rank than any practical science. We will come across this
again as we go on.
Now when we turn to the view now prevailing, I ventured to take the catalogues of the
colleges around here: Claremont, Pomona, and so on. Permit me to read to you. That is
after all objective evidence. There was no attempt made, of course, to print them in order,
because there are many different courses given. I will read to you. “Ethics.” We
recognize that. “Metaphysics.” We recognize that. “Epistemology.” Not there. “Logic.”
There. “History of Philosophy.” Not there. “Philosophy of the Mind.” Not there.
“Philosophic Theology.” Yes. “Political and Legal Philosophy.” Perhaps. “Aesthetics.”
Not there. “Philosophy of Art,” if that is something different from aesthetics. Not there.
“Philosophy of Language.” Not there. “Philosophy of Religion.” Not there.
I could take also other authorities regarding the division of science in modern times, but I
think I will stop there. I will only mention one thing regarding Hegel since I mentioned
him before. In his Encyclopedia of Philosophic Sciences, there exists logic, philosophy of
nature, [and] philosophy of the mind, and this is subdivided into morality of the state,
aesthetics, [and] philosophy of religion, which is not found in Aristotle. And in addition,
Hegel gave lectures which were not part of his printed works on the philosophy of
history, which is not in Aristotle, and on [the] history of philosophy, also not in Aristotle.
So some very great, profound changes have taken place, and some of them we should at
least mention.
One thing is most striking, and is implied in the data which I submitted to you. But I will
try to address the question to you, so that we reach some communication. What is the
most striking difference, overall difference, between the Aristotelian scheme and the
scheme prevailing now?
Student: [. . .]vi

vi

In this and other cases in this session, where the transcriber indicated that that a comment was
“inaudible,” we have substituted ellipses in square brackets.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

5

LS: Yes. In other words, there are quite a few things in Aristotle which are not in the
modern scheme. But is not the converse also true? Where do you find mathematics as
part of philosophy, unless you say symbolic logic and mathematics are the same? Where
do you find physics as a part of philosophy in modern times? So the mere numerical
difference is quite striking, but it is not illuminating.
Student: [. . .]
LS: That is very important. And no less a man than Hegel has said it, especially
regarding ethics: only in modern times did ethics become a theoretical science, meaning
that up to, say, 1700 or so, maybe a bit earlier, ethics was not a theoretical but a practical
science. But that is not the most striking thing.
Student: Could it be that several of Aristotle’s divisions of philosophy have become
empirical? That is, there is now a mathematics of politics, physics, economics, and so on.
LS: Yes, that is probably sound, but I take issue with one of the expressions you used,
and that is “empirical.” That is one of these words which needs considerable explanation.
But let me state it more simply: for Aristotle, there is no distinction between philosophy
and science. They are identical. There are other things that Aristotle calls arts, the art of
the shoemaker, the art of the carpenter, the art of the dramatic poet, but they are not
sciences. The sciences are part of philosophy. Whether these sciences are “empirical” or
“a priori,” that is not a question which arises on Aristotelian terms. We must beware of
complicating things by starting with modern terms which we have not yet understood.
Now this is the key event, an event which is contemporary with us, affecting us every day
in every respect, one could almost say: the distinction of philosophy and science or the
separation of philosophy and science which has taken place in modern times. This can be
explained very simply as follows. In premodern times, Aristotle was up to the sixteenth
century in philosophy still the demigod, but he was never uncontested. There were other
philosophic schools; now all these schools had a physics: there was an Aristotelian
physics, a Platonic physics, a Stoic physics, and an Epicurean physics. There was not the
physics in the way in which there is the art of making shoes. There were no different
Aristotelian or Stoic or Epicurean ways of making shoes. It was left to the competent men
to be the shoemakers. But as far as physics was concerned, to take this most important
example, there was not the physics but always a specific physics of a specific school.
Now this was vilified, not without justice, as a disgraceful state of things. The important
questions, not those dealt with competently by carpenters and shoemakers but which
concerned the cosmos, would be treated in such radically different ways by different
philosophic schools. And therefore they said, “We must make a revolution.” They didn’t
use that word yet, but they meant it. “We must begin from the beginning, doubt
everything; especially that terrible tradition represented by Aristotle.”
Now that happened in the seventeenth century, and the greatest name is that of Descartes,
but also Hobbes can be mentioned. Now they made a new physics which was much more
mathematical than any previous physics had been, and this physics met with an amazing
success. It culminated in the work of Newton, and it deflated all other physics in the
world for good, because the fate of Newtonian physics in the twentieth century is only an
additional victory of Newton and not a refutation of him, because it is a victory according
to Newtonian principles. Now physics became then, to use a bad word, “metaphysically
neutral.” Forgive me, I will never use it again, but this is the first class. And that is of
course a neutrality true not only of physics but also of the other natural sciences,
chemistry, and biology and so on.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

6

Now this was a science, as distinguished from philosophy. That distinction came out only
in the eighteenth century. The sciences had then a character which the rest of philosophy
did not have: the sciences agreed, or at least they knew what to do in case of
disagreement. There were other questions left to the philosophers, and there was of
course as before a disgraceful anarchy: the philosophers could not agree, not only
regarding the answers but even regarding the questions. No wonder that science became
the authority and philosophy became disgraceful, a relic of an unenlightened past
tolerated insofar as it was willing to be the handmaid of science, and quite a few of our
contemporaries think that is exactly what philosophy should be. But all other parts of
philosophy, all other interpretations of philosophy are as absurd as those of alchemy,
astrology and so on, only they appeal a bit more to the heart than astrologers and
alchemists generally do.
But this surely is the great difference: the distinction between philosophy and science.
Once you have this distinction, it is the merest step, which can be made by the meanest
capacity without any guidance, to say we must apply the same distinction to politics.
There is a political science which fundamentally takes as its model the natural sciences,
and that is solid and respectable, where you go out and ask people what they think about
President Johnson and so on. And then there is political philosophy, and that deserves the
fate of the other parts of philosophy: contempt and oblivion. Now this is in our age, since
about eighty years [ago] but more pronounced in this country after the First World War.
There is a distinction made, with which you have all been made familiar in high school, I
assume: that there is a sphere of facts, and that is roughly the sphere of science; and there
are other things called values. And these values, in the sense of “evaluating,” are beyond
the sphere of science and are left to the arbitrary decision of the individual or of society.
Therefore, according to the view now prevailing, there cannot be ethical foundations of
politics, for that would mean evaluating rational activity at the bottom of or indissolubly
linked with the study of political science. vii
There are other points which one could mention to illustrate what I said. For example,
aesthetics, we said, is absent from the Aristotelian scheme. Aristotle has written a
Poetics, which is the doctrine of poetry, of how to write and perhaps also to judge drama
and tragedy. But there is no “aesthetics” there. Why is that so? Well, aesthetics emerged
under this name during the eighteenth century in Germany, shortly before the great
flowering of philosophy in Germany, and it led very soon to the view, underlined
especially by Hegel, according to which that which is by nature beautiful, such as the
human body or certain breeds of dogs or birds—that all natural beauty is much lower in
rank than the beauty created by art. The common ground between modern aesthetics in its
earlier form at least and what Aristotle and Plato intended was the concern with the
beautiful. But in Aristotle, concern with the beautiful had, so to speak, nothing to do with
art. I exaggerate a bit. In the present-day view, the concern with beauty is identical or
almost identical with the concern with art. What has taken place is only an illustration of
the fundamental change of which I have spoken before: nature has lost the status which
she had in former times. And what nature lost, man gained, and especially such men as
those who produced works of art.
A similar conclusion would be arrived at if we [consider] the fact that there is no
philosophy of history in Aristotle, or for that matter in any other classical writer. History
became so important because of a decrease in [the] importance of nature. How these two
vii

For Strauss’s account of this conception of values and its historical origins, see chapter 2 of
Leo Strauss, Natural Right and History (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press,
1965), 35-80.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

7

fundamental facts I mentioned [relate]—the decrease in [the] importance of nature and
the emergence of science in the modern sense—that I ask you to figure out for yourself. I
will only quote the remark of a very respectable classical scholar, which I occasionally
will, to this effect: when the ancients spoke of natural science, the emphasis was on
nature, natural. When we speak of natural science, the emphasis is on science.
Now I have hitherto argued on the basis of the premise that the quarrel between the
ancients and the moderns, this fundamental change in human thought about everything
that has taken place since the seventeenth century, is decisive for an understanding of
anything, and in particular for the ethical foundations of politics. But is this truly the most
important issue? Let me return to the beginning of this lecture. I mentioned the
expression “Machiavellianism,” the view that politics is incompatible with any ethical
foundations, to say it very simply, which doesn’t mean that a wise politician wouldn’t be
ethical from time to time; of course he would. But this precisely is his unethical practice,
that he is moral from time to time. Therefore, as Machiavelli in his great clarity put it, he
will use virtues and vices according to the circumstances. In some circumstances, it is
very foolish to be vicious—virtue pays much better—but in other circumstances the
opposite is true. And then the conclusion is so simple that I am ashamed to spell it out.
Now [are] Machiavellianism and its opposite, which I called anti-Machiavellianism, not
much more important than the quarrel of the ancients and the moderns? And is this not an
issue which is wholly untouched by the emergence of the modern mind in
contradistinction to the ancient mind? Are there not in both epochs both Machiavellians
and anti-Machiavellians? The answer on that level at which we ask it would be an
emphatic yes, and you would know some examples. Do you know some Machiavellians
in this broad and loose sense in classical antiquity? I really would like to establish some
contact, and therefore I raise this question.
Student: Callicles.
LS: Yes, very good. And another one, perhaps the most important.
Student: The Melian dialogue.viii
LS: Yes. And on the other hand, we find of course anti-Machiavellians in classical
antiquity, Aristotle perhaps the most outstanding of them; and in modern times, Kant and
Thomas Paine, whom I mentioned before. Now this is undoubtedly true, that there are
issues which are not affected by that fundamental change of which I spoke before, but
nevertheless there may be a profound difference between modern Machiavellianism and
premodern Machiavellianism. And similarly, correspondingly there may be a profound
difference between modern anti-Machiavellianism and ancient anti-Machiavellianism. So
Machiavellianism does not mean exactly the same thing when applied to Machiavelli, or
when applied to the Athenians of the island of Melos, Callicles, or Thrasymachus and
such people. Still, we must try to get a notion of what has not been changed regarding our
great issue, in that great quarrel of the moderns with the ancients.
First, let me get rid of the proper name Machiavellianism, because that would mean
identification with this particular individual, and let me also get rid of
anti-Machiavellianism. I think it is possible provisionally to call the one alternative
idealism and the other materialism, meaning this (because those words have many

viii

See Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 5.84-116.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

8

meanings): that a man who believes that there are ethical foundations of politics may be
called an idealist; a man who denies them may be called a materialist.
Now what do we mean by these terms idealism and materialism in a broader context?
There is one view according to which man is the only earthly being that is akin to the
highest ground of everything; or, which is only a reformulation of the same thing: only
the highest in man is akin to what is the highest simply. [The view was formed]7 that the
highest in man is the intellect, and that the highest simply was the ruling mind. This a
short time ago would have been called idealism. The alternative view is then that the
highest in men or man as such is not more akin to the highest than anything else, a view
which you find not only in our time but also in classical antiquity. The people who
asserted that the ultimate cause of everything are atoms and the void meant—and did not
merely imply, but meant—that man’s superiority, his intelligence, has no more to do with
these true elements of the whole, the atoms and the void, than perhaps a stone or a dog.
In more practical terms, by idealism I understand provisionally the view which tries to
understand the low in the light of the high. By materialism I understand the view which
tries to understand the high in the light of the low. In other words, the one school of
thought, if this is not too narrow a term, tries to understand behavior in the light of the
highest possible human behavior, and the other in the opposite way, because it would say
[that] what is most common should be the key to what is less common. Therefore the
most common, in the other meaning of the word “common,” should be the key to the
highest.
In classical antiquity both parties agreed as to man’s being a part of the whole of nature,
even if man is its most noble part. Accordingly, they said that the good life is the life in
accordance with nature. Both schools said that, but the difference between the idealists
and materialists is this: the materialists said [that] the good is identical with the pleasant.
Morals, as we would say, or the noble and just, as they saw it, [are] only for the sake of
the pleasant. For example, if you want to have sound sleep, you will not give false
testimony, because then you may be disturbed by dreams of arrest, if not by knocking at
your door. In other words, this view called hedonism, being the view that the good is
identical with the pleasant, or reducible to the pleasant, was fundamentally and
knowingly selfish and in no way public-spirited. The alternative view, the idealistic view,
was definitely public-spirited. And according to that view, the moral, or the noble and
just, is higher than the pleasant. The remarkable thing is that in classical antiquity only
the idealistic view of the whole led to political philosophy. Only the idealistic
philosophers were public-spirited. The materialistic philosophers were not
public-spirited; therefore they did not develop a political philosophy in any serious sense
of the term.
Now when we turn to modernity (and by this I will come to a conclusion of these
introductory remarks), the peculiarity of modernity as it exists from the time of Bacon
and Descartes can be reduced to this proposition: while man is obviously primarily a part
of the whole, he can become the master of the whole, a thought wholly alien to the
ancients. Nay, without human mastery of the whole, the whole is very imperfect. Think of
all the diseases ix which are produced without such mastery.
The condition prior to any human effort at mastery was called in the practical seventeenth
century the state of nature, especially by Hobbes in a beautiful formulation. We know

ix

This word is uncertain.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

9

how he described it: “nasty, brutish, and short.”x That is nature, the state of nature, and
we make something tolerable out of it by our efforts. The depreciation of nature is
implied in the human effort to subjugate nature, to conquer nature. The good life is not
the life according to nature; the life according to nature would be nasty, brutish, and
short. The good life is the life in which we can preserve ourselves comfortably; if I may
use this expression [as] phrased by John Locke: “comfortable self-preservation.” Very
well, so nature is not good; it is a stepmother rather than a mother. How shall we take our
bearings, then?
Now the great event in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was this: to replace
nature in its normative functions by reason, so that you get, for example, instead of a law
of nature, a moral law, a law of reason, which is no longer a law of nature. The final step,
which [was] taken in the nineteenth century and the dimensions of which have not been
mastered by anyone, is that reason was eventually replaced by history. That is, history
takes the place of nature in its quasi-normative function. It would be necessary in order to
put some flesh on these bones to explain in greater detail the genesis of this modern
attempt, but for this we would have to know somewhat more than we are supposed to
know now: first of all, about classical political philosophy, and then about what the
revolution or revolt against classical political philosophy by Machiavelli meant. There
may be an occasion later on of course to go into this.
For the moment, I would like to add one remark. When we see this question of the
ancient and modern, we see immediately that the quarrel was not an event that happened
in the seventeenth or the early eighteenth century but is [still] with us, if it is true that
what modern thought aims at is to make man the master of his fate. Then the question
arises, and it arises more easily today than prior to 1945: can man be the master of his
fate in any serious sense? I mean not the individual [as master] of his fate within society,
but mankind, man as the species: can he be the master of his fate? That is a question for
us, and when you look at the daily papers and consider the possibilities of nuclear war
and other things of the same kind which are partly available and partly will be available
within a very short time, it is not so obvious in every respect a sound decision to say: Let
us increase man’s power thousandfold, millionfold, and then he will be happy. Because
power and wisdom are two different things, and while modern science and technology are
wonderful in giving us power, they do not give us wisdom, and they do not claim to give
us wisdom. I know that some8 write articles in the Sunday magazines in their capacity as
scientists, but their statements there are not scientific statements but simply [statements]
made by men who happen to be scientists. There is no connection between their human
wisdom and their science. Therefore, to repeat, the quarrel between the ancients and the
moderns is at the bottom of all our problems today. None of these problems can be
properly articulated, adequately articulated, without having paid due consideration to this
quarrel.
Now this much in the way of an introduction. We should begin at the beginning of
Aristotle’s Ethics. I made arrangements that you should have copies today. I suppose
some of you at least will have copies. Now how shall we proceed? At another place,
where I taught formerly, I had an old student of mine, Mr. Reinken, xi whom some of you
know, who acted as my reader. He had a very clear enunciation, and he read in a very
medieval manner, and I think it is a practical procedure, although it is medieval. I wonder
if there is not here someone who is willing to do that service for me. Well, shall I ask you

x
xi

Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (1651), part 1, chapter 13.
Donald Reinken served as reader in many of Strauss’s courses at the University of Chicago.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

10

to do that? Good. Very slowly, and sit here. Now we forget about the introduction except
occasionally to think about it, and begin literally at the beginning.
Reader:
Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and every pursuit, is thought to
aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been declared to be that at
which all things aim. (1094a1-3)xii
LS: Good. Let us stop here. There are some minor corrections. “Every art and every
inquiry, similarly art as well as choice, is thought to strive for some good. Therefore
people have nobly”—or “rightly”—“described the good as that for which all things
strive.” So all specific[ally] human activities, that is what Aristotle seems to say, aim at
some good. Or is there any specific[ally] human activity which Aristotle has omitted?
Art, in the wide sense, where it includes also the fine arts, science, and action. What else
is there specifically human which he has omitted? Could we quarrel with him on this
point? We should think about that. That science, or inquiry—inquiry means “the way
after” in Greek—pursues also the good I believe is not difficult to understand, the good
being the truth.
You see, Aristotle is dealing with two kinds of things here. “Every art and every
method,” literally, “similarly [every] action as well as choice, is thought to strive for
some good.” He makes the distinction: on the one hand you have art, and on the other
science. You must distinguish between action and choice. What does this mean? He puts
it here dramatically, almost metrically: “Every art and every method, similarly action as
well as choice”—avoiding “all,” but meaning it. What does he mean by that? In the first
place, it is an indication of this great distinction between the theoretical and practical,
although it is not identical with that by any means. Why does he make a distinction
between action and choice? Do you have any action without choice? The choice may be
foolish, but still, must they not always be together? I believe what Aristotle has in mind is
that he wants to make a kind of parallelism on both sides. Two items: art and science on
the one side; on the other, the outgoing, visible action. And the inner thing, just as science
is inner: choice. The Greek means preferring, preference: choosing one thing in
preference to another. But one could say [that] if someone chooses blackberry pie in
preference to cherry pie, it is also a choice, isn’t it? One does not mean [choices like]
that; therefore some translations say “moral choice.” In order to avoid the word “moral”
here, let us say this: Aristotle means by choice such acts with a view to which we are
called noble or base. No one is called noble or base because he prefers this kind of pie to
that kind of pie. But we do not have another word to use [here] except “choice.”
Now when he says “is thought to be . . . all things are thought to strive toward some
good”: the Greek word is normally translated by “it seems to be,” but itxiii has a great
range of meanings, from mere seeming, to “it is held to be” (which would still be
seeming), to a kind of expression of courtesy. You don’t want to be too emphatic, don’t
wish to say “It is so,” so “[It] seems,” you say [instead]. That is not a difficulty, but the
difficulty is this. Granted that all human pursuits strive for some good, does this satisfy
our saying that all things strive for some good, as Aristotle seems to say? Man is
obviously a being which acts, which pursues purposes. But do all things have purposes?
Do stones have purposes? Well, you know surely this much, that according to Aristotle
stones do have purposes. That is one of the grave errors to which he [was] given. The
xii

The student reads from Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Sir David Ross (London:
Oxford University Press, 1954).
xiii
Strauss proceeds to delineate several senses of the Greek verb in question (dokei).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

11

stones, like everything else, are seeking their natural place. This theory of gravitation
differs from the Newtonian one. Does it follow when we start from the purposes of man
that all things are purposive? Surely not. Only under one condition did Aristotle make a
case for this view: on the condition that man is the key to everything, so that even the
form of a stone cannot be properly understood unless it is viewed in the light of human
action—human mental action.
At any rate, what the first sentence suggests is this: not only all men but all beings strive
for the same thing, for the good. So there are no questions. If all things strive for the
good, [then] from a practical point of view there is no question. If all beings strive for the
same, then this is the end of all effort. But then how does he go on? Read slowly.
Reader:
But a certain difference is found among ends.
LS: Yes, now there is a certain difference—one could almost say discord—of the ends.
So this beautiful harmony that all things strive for the same [thing] is disturbed by this
discord. The ends: that means the good things, of course. Surely all beings strive for the
good. But the good of the cat is not the good of the dog. Aristotle does not have merely
this in mind. But that is the general structure of the first chapter, that he gradually
introduces us to the enormous differences and discords which exist in all the spheres of
the good and the bad.
Reader:
Some are activities, others are products apart from the activities that produce them.
LS: Now it is obvious he has in mind the differences among human ends. There are
activities which are ends in themselves. Dancing need not have another purpose except to
dance. Think of a ballet dance. But there are others where the activity is not an
end. What the shoemaker does: the end is not shoemaking (except in the case of some
shoemakers), but the shoe, the thing separate from (a result of) the activity. This is easy
to understand, I believe.
Reader:
Where there are ends apart from the actions, it is the nature of the products to be better
than the activities. (1094a3-6)
LS: Aristotle indicates here something of the general procedure in this chapter and to
some extent in the whole book. There are a variety of ends. He has given us one
specimen. But at least in one sphere, when the end is different from the activity, [as in]
shoemaking, in these things the products, [the] works, are by nature better than the
activities. You prefer the shoe to the shoemakers, and you have interest in the
shoemaking only because it is productive of shoes. That is at least what Aristotle here
assumes. So in other words, it is by nature. There is a great variety of ends, a confusing
variety, but there is also some natural order. The fact that shoemaking and dancing are
different things is mitigated by the fact that in the sphere of shoemaking we know at least
that the shoemaking is intrinsically lower, by nature worse, than the shoe. Of course, a
question is not answered: what about the order of rank between the two kinds of ends?
On the one hand we have the shoes, houses, or whatever it may be, and on the other hand
we have dancing and other activities. Which of the two is the higher, the activities as
activities or the products as products? This question Aristotle doesn’t answer. So we are
truly at the beginning. Now let us read.
Reader:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

12

Now, as there are many actions, arts, and sciences, their ends also are many; the end of
the medical art is health, that of shipbuilding a vessel, that of strategy victory, that of
economics wealth.
LS: There are also kinds of human activities which do not lead up to works, to products,
and these activities are arts and sciences. One might perhaps translate 9 [sciences] by
“knowledges” to be closer to the Greek and to avoid certain connotations going with the
present-day word “science.”xiv Again we see a very great variety of ends. He gives here
only examples which show the variety of arts, as you see. These are all arts: [the] medical
art, the shipbuilding art, the strategic and the economic art. Not all of them are devoted to
a final good. For example, a man could say: “Health is surely a very great good and I
don’t have to have a reason why I should be well.” Some people would say that of
wealth, I believe. But regarding shipbuilding, all men I think would agree that the
shipbuilding art is in the service of another art, namely, the art of sailing. You build ships
in order to use them. If you want a ship for a museum, that is a special case into which we
do not have to go here. So this great variety of the arts to which he points by giving these
four examples is a very abbreviated indication of the great variety of ends, because there
is nothing said about the variety of actions and of the sciences here. Now let us go on.
Reader:
But where such arts fall under a single capacity—as bridle-making and the other arts
concerned with the equipment of horses fall under the art of riding, and this and every
military action under strategy, in the same way other arts fall under yet others.
LS: Here Aristotle, [having shown the bewildering variety of ends, shows the limits to
this variety, proceeding fundamentally in the same way as before] 10. The variety of the
ends is somehow limited by the hierarchic order of at least some of the arts. Everyone
will admit that the bridle-making art is subject to riding. The horseman will tell the
bridlemaker why he needs a bridle and will give him the general idea. The horseman is
unable to invent the bridle, perhaps, or to make it, but nevertheless the bridlemaker is the
servant of the horseman. But the horseman himself is of course in his fullest form the
cavalryman, and he is as such subject to a cavalry commander. The cavalry commander,
himself a big man, is still not the uppermost man; there is a man called the general, who
determines what things are to be done by the cavalry.
You see Aristotle speaks here no longer of arts but of abilities. The Greek word is
dynameis, “powers,” which is broader than [the] arts. He says later on “every warlike
action,” and not “every warlike art,” and so he has in mind the full variety of human ends
of which he had spoken in the first section. Now let us read further.
Reader:
In all of these the ends of the master arts are to be preferred to all the subordinate ends;
for it is for the sake of the former that the latter are pursued. (1094a6-16)
LS: Now Aristotle uses here for the first time in this work a term which has since his
time become very [often] used in this peculiarly Aristotelian sense. Where he says
“master art,” [the Greek] is “architectonic art.” Here we have one sphere of human
activity, house-building, in which11 case [it] is particularly obvious that you have all
kinds of people: bricklayers, carpenters, and what have you. There is one man who
decides all issues in the last resort, and that is the architect. And Aristotle uses this word,
the art of the architect gives the general plan of the house and is superior to all other arts
xiv

Strauss retranslates epistēmē.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

13

dealing with housebuilding. And he enlarges the meaning of that term. He would say, for
example, that the art of the general is the architectonic art regarding war. The reasoning is
this: the ends of the architectonic arts are more choiceworthy than the ends of the arts
subject or inferior to the architectonic arts. What we choose in the first place, what we
pursue, is not that there be a wall or that there be a roof, but that there be a house;
therefore we may need wood, bricks, timber, or whatever it may be, but we do not choose
the house for the nails, but the nails for the house.
There is an apparent infinity of ends, and therefore also an apparent infinity of arts
devoted to this infinite variety of ends. In this variety, there is order; there is not a
distracting discord and confusion but harmony. Now whether Aristotle can maintain this
in the face of certain difficulties we must see. But the point of view from which he looks
at this is, I think, very important. Aristotle starts from the great variety of ends. And then
he turns as it were from the ends to the arts, not [to] the fine arts, although they are the
most noble in a way but not the most important, [but to the arts of] the shoemaker,
carpenter, physician and such. Why does he do that, turn from the ends to the arts? Well,
we can say that every art is a rational activity for achieving a certain end. So by turning to
the rational activity he reminds us of reason and therewith of order. And then finally he
will reach the point, very soon in fact, where he will assert or almost assert that this
architectonic structure, which we see so easily in the case of the architect proper and the
general, that this kind of subordination and superordination (let us assume there are four
or five more such arts) which Aristotle now proposes will be one superarchitectonic art
which ultimately controls all other arts. And what do you think is this super-art of human
arts?
Student: God?
LS: Politics! Because everything that is done in a political society is directly or indirectly
subject to the political society. The architect of course has to listen to what laws
regarding housebuilding say. The general has of course to be subject to political
authority, as we all know too well. And the one who said “God” did not say the wrong
thing; she went too fast. We are speaking here of the human activity. And the roof there
is the political art. But the human things are only part of the whole. And the question
arises: is there not a kind of architect of the whole? And that would be—one could not
but call [such an architect] God. That is perfectly sensible. There is only one objection in
this case, and that is that according to Aristotle the cosmos is eternal, and since it is
eternal it cannot have a maker, an architect. But within limits Aristotle can speak of that.
Now I would like to find out whether you have any questions. Protests?
Student: In your conception of the state of nature, you referred to Hobbes as an example.
What would Rousseau say about that?
LS: Good point. Rousseau is so well known because he has taught the goodness of
nature. Man is good; man is by nature good. Is that what you mean? Well, I give you an
answer which cannot satisfy you, but a satisfactory answer would require at least a halfhour exposition, which I cannot do now. Rousseau represents in a very important part of
his work an objection to Hobbes and Locke. Therefore the Hobbean solution was this: the
state of nature was terrible and so let us be obedient subjects of any power that is. That is
Hobbes’s teaching. And protected by the king over any other sovereign, let us
comfortably preserve ourselves. Now Rousseau loathed this notion; that is the view
which he almost called “the view of the bourgeoisie,” and he thought of the citizen as in
ancient times. Therefore, to some extent Rousseau is one of the rebels, but a somewhat

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

14

closer study of Rousseau would show that while he protests against Hobbes and Locke
and the others, he in fact radicalizes the modern tendency.
Student: Since Aristotle is a student of Plato, the first thing you notice upon opening this
book is that it is not a dialogue. Could you comment on why it is not a dialogue?
LS: I would say—you mean, for some reason or other, you have had a course on Plato
before you had a course on Aristotle?
Student: I mean, in a sense Aristotle is a pupil of Plato.
LS: Yes, but on the other hand, prior to Plato many men also didn’t write dialogues. In
other words, the natural way to write is to write, to use a term which is not too technical,
treatises. You just put forth in your own words, without any shenanigans, what you think.
That is what Aristotle does. Surely the Platonic dialogue is a great problem. The
Aristotelian treatise as such is not: that is a man who has to teach something, and
therefore he teaches it. And since you bring up this question of the form, let me say one
point which I have made before. From Aristotle’s point of view the Ethics is not his most
important work. The Physics or Metaphysics are much more important. But I think the
Ethics is his most beautiful book. You know the most important doesn’t have to be the
most beautiful, and I think at some point most of you will come to share this feeling, if
you do not already now.
Student: You may think that although Aristotle saw a variety of goods in nature, that
there was a harmony among the ends. But this means, for example, that if species such as
human beings and bacteria are at war with each other—and until recent medical trends,
bacteria won this war—there is a change in the harmony.
LS: Yes, I will answer your question, but you could have chosen a simple example which
I gave: the cat and the bird. The cat wants to kill the bird, and the bird does not wish to be
killed by the cat. I think we can assume this fact; you can even observe it from time to
time. Is there harmony? Aristotle would say, yes, ultimate harmony—not that the bird
ever likes it, but it is in a way [harmonious] that the cat eats the bird, because the cat is in
a way a higher animal than the bird.
Student: If the cat is higher than the bird and he kills the bird, well, if man is higher than
these bacteria, he has to kill these bacteria.
LS: Sure, he does it all the time.
Student: Yes, but until recent medical advances—
LS: But I would not give such a pessimistic picture of the situation in medicine as it was
until the late century. If you think of such men as Plato, Aristotle, and Socrates, they were
not killed prematurely by bacteria. The Athenians had much more to do with that. And I
have also overheard occasionally that the successful fight against bacteria and other
nuisances has also destroyed certain immunities which man developed somehow without
medical benefits. But the simplest example is this: think of cat and bird. What Aristotle
says nevertheless is [that] surely the good of the cat and the good of the bird are
incompatible, and yet there is ultimate harmony which we understand when we consider
the order of rank of the various things.
The most important assertion of Aristotle in this respect is [that], at least among the
earthly beings, man is unquestionably the highest, a premise which has been frequently

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

15

attacked, but on which we act all the time. A simple example: President Roosevelt in the
Second World War spoke of the four freedoms; for example, freedom from fear. xv Do
you remember that? And what did he mean by that? Did he mean that the tiger and
leopard should be free from fear? He meant of course only freedom from fear for human
beings, and if someone says that is only abominable human pride, that man thinks he
should be something special while other animals are not, then I would say: is not the fact
of foolish pride for the species not something which proves in itself the reasonableness of
that pride?
1

Deleted “have.”
Deleted “also.”
3
Deleted “by.”
4
Deleted “only.”
5
Deleted “they always had this.”
6
Moved “also.”
7
Deleted “there was formed the view.”
8
Deleted “of them.”
9
Deleted “it.”
10
Changed from “proceeding fundamentally in the same way as before, after having shown the variety, the
bewildering variety of ends, the limits to this variety.”
11
Deleted “the.”
2

xv

In his State of the Union Address on January 6, 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt
identified America’s war aims as the four freedoms: freedom of speech; freedom of worship;
freedom from want; freedom from fear.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 1

16

Session 2: February 14, 1968i
Leo Strauss: Now I sketched to you last time two broad comprehensive considerations
which we must never lose sight of when engaging in a rather detailed study of at least
some sections of Aristotle’s Ethics. Such considerations are needed to counteract a
danger that is perhaps particularly great in our age of ever-increasing specialization,
namely, the danger being that we exclude from sight, from consideration very important
matters in the vain hope that George will take care of them—George being another
specialist, maybe a sociologist, psychologist, analytical philosopher, or what have you.
The classic formulation for this passing of the buck was coined about a hundred fifty
years ago by Comte, Auguste Comte, ii one of the greatest heirs and in some ways the
classic interpreter of modern science, namely, of that science which is definitely
nonphilosophic: you remember what I said last time about the philosophic character of
science in the old scheme, and the separation of philosophy and science which has taken
place in modern times.
Now he called his position positive philosophy, philosophie positive. In other words, it
was still philosophy, no question about that. But the peculiarity was [that] it is positive,
and therefore since that time the word “positivism” has become of a general use. And the
main thesis is this: that the way towards the truth is that of modern science. Modern
science is an approach to all theoretical and practical questions. It was preceded by
radically different approaches. The first was the theological one, where all things were
traced to so-called personal powers or personal power. And the second stage he called
metaphysical, and that is represented, say, by Plato and Aristotle in classical antiquity and
by the great system-builders of the seventeenth century in modern times. Now both
approaches, the theological and the metaphysical, are bankrupt, and the only one which is
theoretically feasible and at the same time offers some hope for human practice is the
positive approach, the approach peculiar to modern science.
Now what is the peculiarity of positive science, in contradistinction to theology and
metaphysics? The chief answer is this: theology and metaphysics try to answer the
question of why. This question is abandoned by science in favor of the question of the
how. “Why do bodies fall?” “What is the secret of gravitation, that mysterious force?”
This is theological or metaphysical, according to Comte, whereas the question “With
what speed do bodies fall?,” the how of falling is a scientific and reasonable question.
Now there is this difficulty here. It may be true that men cannot answer the questions of
the why and therefore one acts prudently by limiting oneself to the questions of the how.
Yet the questions of the why remain. They are not meaningless questions; they are only
perhaps unanswerable questions. They continue to bother man despite or because of all
progresses of science, so much so that even an infinite progress of science in the future
Strauss begins by discussing the requirements for receiving a grade in the course. These remarks
have been omitted.
ii
Auguste Comte (1798-1857), French philosopher and founder of positivism.
i

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

17

offers no hope of ever giving us an answer to the question of the why, of ever solving the
enigmas with which man is confronted.
We have no right to assume, in addition, that man has infinite time at his disposal for
progressing. Even granting that in an infinite progress all riddles would be solved, we
don’t know whether there will be an infinite time at our disposal, and not only because of
the atomic bomb but also perhaps because of a certain perhaps built-in limitation of the
duration of human life on earth. Hence the unsolved and insoluble questions of the why
threaten the whole edifice of science. They deprive it of its ultimate importance. For
example, if science can teach us a lot regarding means for any ends that we might choose
but cannot tell us what ends to choose—and on this, the ends, everything depends—
therefore the dignity of1 science is greatly threatened by the fact that it cannot answer the
question of the why. And this has led to a popularly known phenomenon which was
called by a sociologist the flight from scientific reason, and I think that all they meant by
it was that people were fundamentally dissatisfied because their deepest and most serious
questions were beyond the ken of science. It is a question which I am in no position to
answer but which has often been raised: how far this fact, this essential limitation of
science and the dissatisfaction with what science can do, contributes to the unrest on
some campuses.
So we try to counteract the narrowness of specialization by engaging in broad and
comprehensive consideration. And we do this for good or evident reasons: however poor
our achievement may be, our pursuit in itself is sensible. I believe I have shown that it is
sensible. In doing so, I have shown that there is a rational end: clarity about the
fundamental issue, a rational end, a rational ought, for we cannot help, if we understand
something as evidently necessary, [doing] it unless we are prevented from doing so by
some accidental fact.
It is impossible to say [where] my theoretical reflection of last time [stopped] and my
moralizing, my exhortation, my preaching, began.2 They are inseparable. [It is impossible
to say] where I made the inevitable but allegedly vicious transition from factual questions
to value questions. To that extent, I hope that I helped you somewhat to understand
Aristotle’s Ethics, to look at things from Aristotle’s point of view: from the point of view
which does not permit the fact–value distinction, as it is now said.
I would like to make a remark in passing. The fact–value distinction must not be taken
too seriously or literally. It cannot be maintained in any long run, in any broad and not
merely technical or academic consideration. For instance, I read in yesterday’s Los
Angeles Times the following sentence:
“We have failed to understand the implications of the new vision of man, which is
accepted by an ever-growing number of social scientists, that so soon as sufficient food,
clothing, and shelter are available, man is forced by profound psychological pressures to
drive toward self-actualization. Individuals who are deprived of the opportunity to strive
to achieve their full potential will drift into personal disorientation or drift into violence.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

18

Here we see a reference to “the new vision of man.” And let us grant to the author that it
is new: man is happy and gentle, provided his comfortable self-preservation is
guaranteed. That is the new vision. Man is not by nature good, for by nature he does not
have the means of comfortable self-preservation, but after man has conquered nature, as
he has done now, he can make himself happy and gentle. (He uses much more
highfalootin’ expressions, but I try to translate them into simple language.) It is of course
presupposed here that to be happy and gentle is good, and to be unhappy and violent is
bad. Well, I think we can grant this without being petty, and accept it at first glance, at
any rate. To be at peace with oneself—to know what one wants, one can also say—and at
peace with one’s fellow man seems to be preferable to the alternative. But even on the
most superficial level, a difficulty arises. Are food, clothing, and shelter the only ends of
man? And does the nonavailability of these three items alone make men unhappy and/or
violent? I think we do not need to have recourse to our private experiences. If we have
read a few novels, we will know that there is such a thing called unhappy love, and also
unhappy marriages, and that this has nothing to do with food, clothing, shelter, and so on.
The practical conclusion, therefore, drawn by quite a few of our contemporaries, is that
you must have of course a solution of the food and shelter problem, either in the
utilitarian or in the Marxist spirit, but you must also have a solution to the problem of
unhappy love, and that means psychoanalysis. So Marxism or utilitarianism and
psychoanalysis together have a very great power, open or concealed, in present-day social
science.
But without any disrespect to hunger and sex, are there no other ends or good things
which a true vision of man, in contradistinction to the new vision of man, would have to
consider? What about premature violent death, for example? What about death itself? Are
these not important considerations? Whatever one may say against Aristotle’s Ethics, he
does not make the mistake of taking such a narrow view of the human ends or goods as
the new vision of man does. This is another simple consideration [for] why we should
pay some attention to Aristotle.
Now to return to the chief subject of today’s lecture, I have asserted last time that we
must start from the broadest possible considerations, and I sketched two such
considerations. The first I indicated by the terms Machiavellianism and antiMachiavellianism, which I then replaced by the opposition of materialism and idealism.
This seems to be the most fundamental alternative, the most comprehensive alternative,
an alternative coeval, if not with man, surely with philosophy. An eternal alternative, as
we may provisionally say. The second consideration I considered was that of the quarrel
between the ancients and the moderns: the fundamental difference between antiquity and
modernity, between ancient materialism and modern materialism, and between ancient
idealism and modern idealism. This alternative is not eternal but would have to be called
historical, because surely the modern alternative was not available in classical times. It is
not easy to say which of these two fundamental alternatives is more fundamental than the
other, or even whether this question makes sense. Let us then leave this question open.
I illustrated the quarrel between the ancients and moderns by contrasting the Aristotelian
division of philosophy and the one that prevails now. I suggested that the difference

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

19

between modern and ancient philosophy has something to do with the difference between
the attempt at human mastery of the whole and the denial of the possibility or desirability
of such mastery. Accordingly the ancient thinkers held that the good life is the life
according to nature. Nature, as it were, establishes the norm, the end for our life. The end
does not have its root in man’s establishing or setting it. In contradistinction, the
depreciation of nature in modern times: the striving for liberation from nature’s apron
strings—the Kantian formula—and thus to make man sovereign, replacing nature by
reason and eventually by history.
Now I will fill up my sketch by speaking more particularly on the quarrel between
ancients and moderns within political philosophy or political science. I say “or,” political
philosophy or political science, because in premodern times political philosophy and
political science were the same thing. Now we have the separation. And it should at least
be for us a question: which of the two alternatives is sound, the identification or the
separation [of the two]?
I have to say therefore a few words about the general character of classical political
thought. If we contrast, say, Plato or Aristotle with what is being done in political science
now, what strikes us most, I think, is that in ancient times political science, political
philosophy had a direct relation to political life which does no longer exist. The questions
which political philosophy or political science raised were the same as those raised in the
political arena. And that shows itself in the fact that in Plato’s and Aristotle’s political
science or political philosophy there is hardly any term which did not stem from the
political arena but was hatched in academies. The political philosopher or political
scientist looked in the same direction as the citizen or statesman. He does not look at
political life from without, like the observer of microbes, stars, or what have you, but he
takes his stand within it. And this has radically changed in modern times. I think I will
draw a picture. [LS writes on the blackboard.] So if this is the standpoint of the citizen or
statesman, he looks at political things in this perspective. Now the political philosopher
or scientist of ancient times stands also here and looks here. There is an alternative way
of looking at it, namely, to stand here and to look at it from the outside. [LS taps with the
chalk.] Is this clear?
Now the difference between the political philosopher or political scientist and the citizen
or statesman, according to the older view, is merely this: that the political philosopher
looks in the same direction but further afield. In other words, this arrow will go on, will
be continued beyond the point beyond which it was continued by the citizen. And this is
connected with the fact that the political philosopher is supposed to have a function
which no one else could fulfill, a very high function, namely, in the first place to be the
arbiter par excellence. Political life means political conflict, conflict of various groups.
The most well known in ancient and modern times were the rich and the poor. But
sensible men do not want conflict but harmony and peace. And how to establish peace?
Answer: you have an impartial arbiter. This happens all the time in political life. But to
do this on the highest level and regarding the permanent questions of political life would
seem to be the function of the arbiter par excellence, and that was meant to be the
political philosopher. For the same reason—I cannot now elaborate it with the necessary

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

20

clarity—3the political philosopher was regarded as the teacher of the political men of the
highest order. The political man of the highest order is the legislator, not in the sense in
which the word is now used, where we have many, many legislators, as you know, but [in
the sense of] the man who elaborates a code which should last for quite some time and
not a thing which would be revised every second day or so.
Now the legislator is concerned only with giving the best laws, if he is a reasonable man,
for his community. But he cannot truly know what the best laws for his community are if
he doesn’t know what the best laws simply are, and therefore there must be men who
raise the question of what [are] the best laws simply: that is the teacher of legislators.
More precisely, as Plato and Aristotle teach and some other of their followers have
taught, laws are not the fundamental political phenomenon. What laws are and are not
possible in a given society depends on the politeia, as they said, which I translate by
regime. The common translation is constitution. What it means primarily is the factual
distribution of power within the society. And therefore the ultimate question is not “What
are the best laws?” but “What is the best regime?” And of this best regime they say that it
must be possible. In other words, it must be possible without assuming a miraculous or
nonmiraculous change of human beings. [It requires only] human beings as they are by
nature: bright, stupid, vicious, kind, and so on and so on. No change in this way, but with
such an arrangement that the more desirable people have more to say. This is, according
to their view, the best regime. So it must be possible, but the possibility does not mean
that there is any probability. Both Plato and Aristotle say very emphatically that it is
improbable that the best regime will become actual or was ever actual.
Neither Plato nor Aristotle found any example of what they regarded as the best regime
anywhere at any time. This did not bother them at all, for the following reason. I use now
again a word alien to Plato and Aristotle but easily intelligible to you. The best regime is
an ideal. And not an ideal among many, but the ideal. Now an ideal does not cease to be
an ideal by never being actual. This way of thinking, I think, is very well known to all of
you. For you need at any rate a standard of judgment of the actual, a standard for the
diagnosis of the actual: in what way it is good, [and] in what way it is bad. And therefore
you must have a complete picture of the perfectly good society, of the perfectly good
regime, regardless of whether it is actual. Whether it will be actual or not depends on
chance. As Plato puts it in the Republic, it depends on coincidence; on the coincidence of
philosophy and political power, on philosophy and political power coinciding.
Now this much about the classical approach. We see the origins of the modern approach
by turning to Machiavelli, especially the Prince, chapter 15:
“It now remains to see what should be the ways and conduct of a prince in dealing with
his subjects and his friends, and because I know that many have written on this topic, I
fear that when I too write I shall be thought presumptuous, because in discussing it, I
break away completely from the principles laid down by my predecessors. But since it is
my purpose to write something useful to an attentive reader, I think it more effective to
go back to the practical truth of the subject than to depend on fancies [imaginations—LS]
about it, and many have imagined republics and principalities that never have been seen

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

21

or known to exist in reality. [Plato and Aristotle are obvious examples of that.—LS] For
there is such a difference between the way men live and the way they ought to live, that
anybody who abandons what is for what ought to be will learn something that will ruin
rather than preserve him, because anyone who determines to act in all circumstances the
part of a good man must come to ruin among so many who are not good.” iii
Now this is one of the most important passages ever written. The ancients took their
bearings by how men should live, by how men ought to live, and therefore they arrived at
imaginary principalities. Incidentally, when he speaks of imaginary principalities, he
thinks not only of Plato and Aristotle but of the Bible as well. The Kingdom of God
would have the same characteristics as the kingdom of the philosophers in Plato.
So what Machiavelli tries to do, to use again a convenient slogan, is to make politics a
realistic science, to take men as they are. Thus the chances of actualization of the
desirable order increase enormously. If you make these high demands which Plato and
Aristotle made, then there is no chance, no practical chance, but if you want to put the
goal lower, as Machiavelli did—and it is still a goal, still a kind of ideal, but lower—then
the chances of actualization will increase. In other words, by lowering the goal you
enable yourself to conquer chance. And that is precisely what Machiavelli says in the
same work, chapter 25: chance, fortuna, is a woman who can be forced by the right kind
of man, whereas according to the older view, chance is elusive and cannot be conquered
by anyone.
The ancient philosophers spoke of virtue as the most important consideration.
Machiavelli uses the Italian equivalent of virtue, virtù, but gives it a very new meaning. It
has nothing to do with moral virtue. It has something to do with patriotism or political
virtue, but even that is quite dubious. Now I read to you another passage so that we get
some better understanding. The true history of political philosophy cannot be written on
the basis of explicit quotations alone. One has to do some thinking. If my memory
doesn’t deceive me, Thomas Hobbes never mentions Machiavelli; he surely never
mentions him with any emphasis. And yet without Machiavelli, no Thomas Hobbes.
Now Hobbes says in the Epistle Dedicatory to his Elements of Law: Natural and Politic,
the following thing: “To reduce the doctrine [of justice in policy—LS] to the rules and
infallibility of reason, there is no way, but first to put such principles down for a
foundation, as passion, not mistrusting, may not seek to displace.” iv In other words, we
have to start from foundations agreeable to passion. Nay, as Hobbes makes clear in the
execution of his work, we have to find the principle of political life in a passion, and that
passion he finds in the fear of death. It is something very low, but very common, and
therefore something trustworthy. Low but solid. That was a notion guiding such men like
Hobbes, but also Locke and Rousseau.
Thomas Aquinas, in his discussion of natural law, had made a distinction between three
natural inclinations of man: one toward self-preservation; one toward preservation of the
iii
iv

Presumably Strauss’s translation.
Thomas Hobbes, The Elements of Law, Natural & Politic (1640).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

22

species, as shown in particular by generation of offspring; and one toward knowledge
and, in particular, knowledge of God. v What Hobbes does is to erase the two higher
inclinations—to abstract from them, because that would lead to all kinds of
complications—and to stick to the lowest but strongest most of the time, namely, the fear
of death, or in other words, the desire for self-preservation. Now this foundation was
taken over obviously by Locke and Rousseau, although with not unimportant
modifications, but the principle remains the same. Hobbes already, but more explicitly
Locke put the emphasis on comfortable self-preservation, meaning, sure, if your life is at
stake immediately, if you are threatened by a potential killer, then you are perfectly
pleased if you can just preserve yourself. But apart from such harsh situations, you would
like to preserve yourself comfortably. You have not only a bed, but a comfortable bed.
You have not only food, but tasty food, and so on.
At any rate, in connection with these modern movements, starting in a way from
Machiavelli but more visibly from Hobbes, you have an enormous increment in the
importance of economics. Economics in the way we use the word today did not exist [in
antiquity]. “Economics” meant management of the household. That there were revenues
and expenditures of the city was of course always known, but there was no discipline,
surely no academic discipline, dealing with that. This was done by the practitioners. But
now a science of this kind of thing emerged. And under the name, the first name that later
on [had] this strong baby4 was political arithmetic: reckoning on political mathematics.
That was the work of a man called Sir William Petty. vi Incidentally—yes, the name is
funny. He was a friend of Hobbes, a younger friend of Hobbes. This is a true genealogy, I
believe, of this kind of pursuit. Now I mention, not merely because it is so funny, the
following fact. Sir William Petty went so far as to figure out the worth of a human being
in hard cash, and he went about it in a very sensible way. He said, what does a man fetch
in the slave market in Algiers? And so (I’ve forgotten now the precise sum) so many
guineas: that is the value of a human being.
And then a wiser man, and a shrewder man, Montesquieu, [in] the next century, said:
“No, Sir William is mistaken. This may be the value of an Englishman [laughter], but the
value of a human being may be as a rule much lower. And it may approach zero, and it
may even be less than zero.”vii He was thinking, I suppose, of overpopulation and famine.
So this kind of reflections, which you do not find in classical political philosophy, are an
important ingredient of modern political philosophy.
It is understandable that some noble minds revolted against this low but solid political
science of the seventeenth and eighteenth century. Such men like Shaftesbury (Locke was
a kind of tutor of Shaftesbury, but Shaftesbury didn’t like Locke at all), Rousseau, Kant.
And one could say that this reaction to seventeenth-century political philosophy led to a
restoration of the moral level and dignity of classical political philosophy. That is
possible. That surely needs a very thorough investigation. But one thing remains changed
See Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, First Part of the Second Part, Question 94, Article 2.
Sir William Petty (1623-1687), English political economist and scientist. His Political
Arithmetick was published in 1690.
vii
Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, book 23, chapter 17.
v

vi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

23

despite that protest, that revolt of these noble minds against the too practical minds of
whom I have spoken before: the concern with the actualization of the right political order
remains unchanged. In other words, the simple view that we need an ideal in order to see
clearly as to what we regard as good and noble and independently of whether there is a
prospect that this ideal in its fullness will ever become realized: this is not restored.
I read to you another passage from Kant, Kant being one of the sternest moralists that
ever were, but he also had this very practical side connecting him with Sir William Petty
and other people. “People were in the habit of saying that the establishment of the right
social order requires a nation of angels,” Kant says, “hard as it may sound, the problem of
establishing the just social order is soluble even for a nation of devils, provided they have
sense.” Meaning, provided they are shrewd enough that it is more profitable to them to be
lawabiding citizens than to be criminals. “The fundamental political problem is simply
one of a good organization of the state, of which man is indeed capable.” viii In other
words, if you arrange things in such a manner that crime doesn’t pay—and you don’t
have to be a very noble soul for wishing that and for doing that—then you have solved
the political problem.
Now this concern with the actualization of the right political order shows itself in a
different way in Hegel’s notion of the reasonableness of the historical process. There is a
convergence, we can say, of the ideal and the actual. And that is a necessary
convergence, because the reasonable is actual, and the actual is reasonable. ix So there is
the necessity of the actualization, and according to Hegel’s view this has now been
achieved. The historical process is now completed. This view of Hegel of course seemed
very implausible to people after him, and today there is hardly anyone who is a Hegelian
in this sense of the word. Today it is generally taken for granted that the historical
process is unfinishable; that man is always in the midst of it and never at its end. This
leads to great difficulties of its own, into which I cannot now go. Perhaps we will find
another occasion for that.
Today I limit myself to the most massive difficulty vis-à-vis the view that now prevails,
and that is a view based on the distinction between facts and values as an unbridgeable
gulf. Because this view implies that all values are equal before the tribunal of reason—of
course not for the evaluator: the man who values freedom will not regard the values
going with tyranny or connected with tyranny as high, that goes without saying. But the
scientist, the social scientist, is not supposed to be an evaluator in his capacity as a
political scientist, and as such the values are equal for him.
And now we observe here a phenomenon known from economics, Gresham’s Law: the
bad values drive out the good ones. The unbelievable vulgarization of which we are
witnesses. A few examples: culture meant originally the cultivation of the mind and
especially of the highest powers of the mind. And this word, culture, could be used only

viii

See Immanuel Kant, On Perpetual Peace (1795), “Addendum: On the Assurance of Perpetual
Peace.”
ix
See G.W.F. Hegel, Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1821), “Preface.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

24

in the [singular]x: culture. The human mind being of one fundamental character, there can
only be one culture of it. Today everyone speaks of cultures, and the understanding is that
they are all equal. When the term cultures [first] came out in the plural, people made a
certain distinction between what they called high cultures and low cultures. That was
done, for example, by Spengler and such people. xi But today that is completely
abandoned: all men have cultures; all men are cultured. Now there something rebels in
us, because when you say a man is cultured, you mean something slightly different from
saying that he belongs to a culture. The culture may be one of juvenile delinquents, for
example, and you are not likely to call them cultured human beings. A question which to
my knowledge has not yet been taken up by social scientists is whether lunatics can have
culture, but I think if they are really value-free, they should take up this question very
soon.
Student: . . . studied a little bit, and lunatics are more . . . unacculterated people.
LS: Unacculterated.
Same Student: Although, if they all live together in a lunatics asylum, and get along
with each other, then they’re acculturated to the asylum.
LS: Oh, I see. Well, this is what I would expect, and I would—that must be regarded as a
culture as high—
Same Student: . . . culture.
LS: Yes. So I’m glad that I am in contact with this movement. [Laughter]
Student: As a matter of fact, though, one of our leading political scientists did a study on
the political interchange among inmates of a mental institution. This is regarded as quite
valuable.
LS: Professor Riesman?xii
Same Student: Pardon?
LS: Professor Riesman, by any chance?
Same Student: I don’t believe it was Riesman. I can’t remember who it was.
Another Student: Professor Lasswell.xiii

x

Strauss says “plural.”
Oswald Spengler (1880-1936), German historian and philosopher.
xii
David Riesman, author, with Nathan Glazer and Reuel Denney, of The Lonely Crowd (1950).
xiii
Harold D. Lasswell and Robert Rubenstein, The Sharing of Power in a Psychiatric Hospital
(New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1966).
xi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

25

LS: Pardon?
Student: Professor Lasswell. Yes.
LS: Oh, yes, that is not too surprising. I’m sorry that I made this slip.
Now another term with which we can see what is happening before our eyes is
“personality.” That was originally a very high term. There is a verse by a German, by
Goethe: “The highest blessing of the children of the earth is their personality.” xiv And that
implies that very few people are in fact personalities. Now this is still recognized. For
example, I believe that Dinah Shorexv is a TV personality, and a garbage collector is not a
personality. Here personality however approaches almost the meaning of celebrity, which
was not its original meaning. According to the original meaning, you could be a
personality without being a celebrity, and you could be a celebrity without being a
personality. And yet today, although personality still has this value-meaning, every man
is said to have a personality structure. And it is hard to see how he can have such a
personality structure without being a personality. So this difficulty illustrates again what
is happening after the complete collapse of the difference between the ideal and the
actual. Now this much to conclude my general introduction.
Last time we began our reading of the Ethics, and we have seen that Aristotle stresses, in
this first page which we read, the multiplicity of human ends, and yet he made clear that
there is not a mere confusion and discord, because there is a hierarchy of the arts. I trust
you remember this section of our discussion. And now let us read again—no, we don’t
have to read that, the section we read last time 1094a14 to 16. This was where he spoke
of the architectonic arts, of the ends of architectonic arts. You remember that. What he
says here is this. There is this seemingly infinite variety of ends, but we observe also
kinds of pyramids of the subordination of some arts to others, and therefore of the ends
pursued by one kind of art to the ends pursued by another. The difficulty, however, is
this: there is a kind of pyramid. Aristotle hasn’t said more. And whether these pyramids
will fit into a single, unitary, harmonistic scheme so that there is only one pyramid, that is
the question. To leave it at the examples which Aristotle gave, it is easy to see that the art
of shipbuilding is in the service of sailing, of using the ship, and [is] therefore
subordinate. But health seems to be something choiceworthy for its own sake, and at least
according to many, wealth is also something choiceworthy for its own sake. Do health
and wealth both come together and form a part of a whole, so that the possible conflict
between them is resolved? We have not yet had an answer from Aristotle to this effect.
And now let us continue. But in fairness to you, do you have any difficulty or question
regarding what I stated in my exposition? Now is the time. Yes?

xiv

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Sämtliche Werke. Briefe, Tagebücher und Gespräche, ed.
Friedmar Apel et al., Section I, vol.3/1, ed. Hendrik Birus (Frankfurt a.M.: Deutscher Klassiker
Verlag, 2010), 84. The poem is from the “Buch Suleika” in the 1819 publication of the West-East
Divan.
xv
Dinah Shore (1916-1994), American singer and actress.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

26

Student: You used the word “lowering of goals” to describe what Machiavelli did. But
from Machiavelli’s own point of view was it a lowering of the goals in a public-spirited
sense, or was it simply that there were no other goals but the goals [he identified]?
LS: Yes, that is true. From Machiavelli’s point of view, one would have to say that he
rejected fantastical goals, apparently high, and established in their place rational, sensible
goals, which apparently are low, with this correction. Mr. Fiedler?
Student: You spoke of bad values driving out the good, and I wonder whether this isn’t
always the condition of human activity, one which would vary with the character
of . . . one which is, in certain senses, the same.
LS: Yes, that may be so. But the question is whether the teaching on this subject is in
order if it has this function. For example, the Middle Ages: the medieval universities with
their scholasticism and so on. They surely had frequently the effect of mere routine
rigidity, and other vices of this [sort]. But still, what they said about good and bad was of
a high order, only they were not able properly to transmit it. [This was the] time of [the]
decay of scholasticism. But now we have a science which is flourishing and prosperous
from every worldly point of view and yet has this function. I think that is a deeper defect
than mere ineffectiveness. Yes?
Student: You spoke of Kant saying that, if rational, even a society of devils can reach the
good. Have we ever run across this society that is rational?
LS: No. That is very clear.
Same Student: On your basis, do you feel that a rational society is possible?
LS: Ya, that is a long question, but you ask me for my private opinion.
Same Student: You were saying that in this course we’d be working on the basis [of the
assumption that] such a society is possible.
LS: No, we will investigate its possibility. And one question, for example, would be this:
is moral virtue, of which we will hear quite a bit from Aristotle—and the society in which
the men of moral virtue are in control: is this a rational society? That depends very much
on the status of moral virtue, and we have not yet advanced to this point. The point to
which we have advanced is only this: that there is an almost infinite variety of human
ends, but there is some hope for order, shown by the fact of subordination and
supraordination of the arts procuring those ends. And this fact of supraordination and
subordination you see all the time. Mostly we don’t observe it. But it was only very
recently that I observed that there are two kinds of waitresses: the ones who merely clean
the table, and the others who bring the food. And it is quite reasonable (I checked this by
asking the chairman of this department, who knows more about that) that this is quite
reasonable, because the one activity is higher than the other. There is a purely

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

27

preparatory, negative one, to clean the table, and the other is the one which leads to the
fulfillment of your desire, for which you were there. Now—yes?
Student: Is it not perhaps unfair to Plato to speak of . . . the Republic, to speak of the
ideals? Is that not identifying what Plato’s talking about with the ideals, which the
moderns constantly seek to realize? Would it be not better to speak of them as
paradigms? A paradigm may be capable of realization or not.
LS: Yes. That is a very sensible assertion. The word “ideal” is not a Platonic word and
therefore one should avoid it in strict language, but in an introductory presentation one
may take some liberties. But the more important point which you made is that if we are
easygoing and speak of ideals, the modern ideals are radically different from the
Platonic–Aristotelian ideals. That is the key point. That is one major part, perhaps the
most important part, of the quarrel between the ancients and moderns. And a sign of this
difference is that in the classical scheme political economy plays no role. Somehow it is
not seriously considered. Not even the historian Thucydides, so much admired because of
his realism, says much to speak of about the connection between the Peloponnesian War
and trade. That simply was not interesting. In modern times it is regarded as very
interesting; some people regard it even as most interesting. So that has something to do
with the status of food in the widest sense of the term, or rather, in a rather wide sense of
the term with comfortable self-preservation.
Now I will ask Mr. Wedergreen to begin at a16, if you can find that. “It doesn’t make any
difference,” it says, “whether the activities themselves.”
Reader:
It does not matter whether the ends are operations themselves or something other than the
operations.xvi
LS: “Something at the side of the operations,” let us say. . . “At the side of.” Yes?
Reader:
as in the skills mentioned above. (1094a16-17)
LS: Let us stop here. Now Aristotle states now explicitly that the hierarchic order exists
both regarding the activities which have ends apart from the activities (say, saddle
making is not for its own sake but for the production of something apart from the activity,
at the side of the activity: the saddle) and of those activities which have no ends apart
from the activities (say, riding). But there is a complication here: bodily exercise, of
which riding is a part, does not produce a work as shoemaking produces shoes. Yet
bodily exercise is subservient to the medical art, which has a work outside of the practice
of medicine, that work being health. This is a point made by Thomas Aquinas. xvii But let
us go on and read further. Yes?
xvi
xvii

The reader apparently reads from his own translation.
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §18.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

28

Reader:
If our actions have an end that we wish for itself, and if we wish other things for that end
and not each thing on account of another, for this would involve us in an infinite process
making our desire useless and in vain, then obviously that would be not only a good end
but a supreme end. (1094a17-22)
LS: This will be the good and the best: “good,” i.e., it will be the best. Now what is here
important is that this sentence begins with an “if,” and we must not forget that.
There must be ends chosen for their own sake, Aristotle says here. Desire cannot be
empty and useless altogether, because desire [is natural, or] at least many of our desires
are natural. And what is natural is not empty and useless. That is Aristotle’s assumption,
which he doesn’t speak about here. But of course, even granting that there must be ends
chosen for their own sake, this doesn’t prove that there must be a single such end. I
referred to health and wealth before. It is not sufficient to say that health is a greater good
than wealth. For a poor man, the breadwinner of a large family, it may be better to earn
money than to get medical care for which he cannot pay, an example which Plato uses in
the Republic in the fourth book, where he contrasts the posture of the sensible craftsman,
artisan, who says “I would rather be dead than be a burden on my family,” with the rich
valetudinarian who invests all his efforts and all his money into living as long a time as
possible.
Now let us here at this moment step back and look at the argument as a whole. The
simple basis of Aristotle’s pursuit in this book, the simple beginning of the Ethics, is the
bewildering variety of ends. Aristotle views that variety from the point of view of the
variety of the arts: of the rational endeavors to achieve or procure those ends. Now the
arts show a hierarchy, and therefore also there is a hierarchy of the ends. But is this
sufficient? There are arts directed toward health and wealth, for example. But what about
arts productive of honor and pleasure? Would they not also have to be considered? Why
does Aristotle not speak of that here? Perhaps we can say [that] honor is given, if it is
rightly given, for services, and there is an order of rank of the services too. So would this
not always come back to the point that there is a variety of ends, but also a hierarchy?
As for pleasures, some of you have read Plato’s Gorgias and know a distinction made
there by Socrates: the distinction between arts and flattery. For example, cosmetics.
Medicine is an art; it makes a man healthy within the limits of the possible. But cosmetics
creates only the appearance of health, and it’s therefore a swindle. Socrates calls it a
flattery.xviii So this kind of consideration would also have to come in. But let us now
continue.
Reader:
Knowledge of it therefore would be a great help in human living, for like archers keeping
their eye on the target, we will more likely attain our objective. This being the case, we
must try to determine the general characteristics of this end and to which of the sciences
or skills its study pertains.
xviii

Plato, Gorgias 464b-466a.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

29

LS: Let us stop there. It is really a question in the original. Aristotle says: would it not be
eminently helpful also with regard to life, i.e., in contradistinction to mere knowledge, to
have a single end, a single target, so that we can decide in all cases which of the many
ends has the priority? Would this not be wonderful? But for this purpose we would have
to know first what that target is, namely, the best, which is superior to all other good
things. And second, which kind of human knowledge or faculty is competent to know it?
Because if we don’t have such a faculty or knowledge, then the existence of this end will
always remain dubious. Let us assume for argument’s sake that this best is known only to
women’s intuition. Prior to investigation, we cannot exclude that. Then it would be very
hard for the male part of the human race, and gynecocracy would be established. But we
would be in a difficulty, because a women’s intuition implies that the lady cannot give a
reason. And therefore that could be—Aristotle has not in any way decided the question,
but he prepares now a decision by what he says. Yes?
Reader:
Undoubtedly it would belong to the most truly architectonic science. This to all
appearances is political science. (1094a22-28)
LS: Yes. So Aristotle has given us an answer (whether it is satisfactory or not, we do not
yet know) to this question: how [can] we5 know this best thing? Aristotle answers, as you
see here, not the question of what the best thing is but the question of what knowledge or
faculty is competent to know the best thing. Here again we start from the side not of the
goods or ends but from the side of the arts or knowledges. He qualifies this statement, as
you will have seen. It could seem to be that it is a matter for the most lordly and the most
architectonic art, and as such the political art, the political faculty, comes to sight,
phainetai. This word which he uses, which I translated “comes to sight,” tries to preserve
the ambiguity of the Greek. It is not mere seeming. It may very well be the real stuff,
comes to sight as what it is, but there is a question also whether it is not mere appearance.
Why is the political art the most lordly and the most architectonic of all the arts? Let us
read the sequel.
Reader:
Domestic economy, strategy, and rhetoric fall into political science. Political science in
fact makes use of other practical sciences, even legislating what is to be done and what is
not to be done. Its end therefore embraces the ends of the other practical sciences. For
these reasons then, this end would be the good of man. (1094b2-7)
LS: Meaning the end of political science, the political art or political ability, is the human
good, [which is the end] of no other art. Let us try to understand Aristotle’s argument.
Today, for example, what does it mean that all arts serve the political art? Today,
physicists serve the government, yes? That is one example, a very topical example.
Aristotle gives two reasons: the political art determines which sciences ought to be, ought
to exist in the cities. That seems to be incompatible with academic freedom, but the
question arises whether some arts or sciences are not dangerous to human society.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

30

Aristotle takes this for granted. And the second reason which he gives is that he takes the
most respected of the arts and these are, according to him: the art of the general, that of
the manager of the household, and the art of public speech. Now these are highly
respected arts, as we learn here from Aristotle, and 6 [the practioners of all three] admit
that they are subject to the political art, if only because they are subject to the law. And
the law is the work of the political art. Or is there any difficulty here?
So in other words, it is thinkable that there might be arts or faculties which are not,
according to their own confession, subject to the political art. But the most respected and
respectable arts or faculties are subject to it. Let us assume for one moment that there is
an art of sophistry. This art would deny its being subject to the political art. Think of the
sophists as they appear in Plato’s work. Well, are they respected people? Not among the
right kind of people. [To a student]: What is your point?
Student: I was just going to ask . . . the political art . . . I was thinking of the Ethics,
where the nature of epistēmē doesn’t provide . . .
LS: That is one of the deepest questions, perhaps the deepest question regarding the
Ethics. And it is of no use to give a dogmatic answer, let us see what we learn from it.
But for the time being, we have learned merely this: that Aristotle asserts that the political
art is the art which deals with the highest good. Whether that is unqualifably true or only
qualifiably true, we do not yet know.
Now7 if we follow the drift of the argument, [what Aristotle] does here is this: there is an
art in existence called the political art or science. The very existence of that thing, as the
most architectonic power of man, proves in a manner the existence of a single, highest
end. You remember that you have on the one side the good things, and on the other side
the arts. Now if the one side is pyramidal, culminating in the highest art, it is plausible to
expect that there will be a similar pyramidality on the side of the good [things]. That is
not a proof but is leading up toward some expectation, and then we must see later on
whether Aristotle can make stick what he here only suggests. Now let us read the sequel.
Reader:
Even though the good be the same for one man and for the whole state, it seems—
LS: “State” means city. All right. Go on.
Reader:
for the whole—
LS: “City.”
Reader:
it seems much better and more perfect to procure and preserve the good of the whole city.
It is admirable indeed to preserve the good of the individual, but it is better still and more

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

31

divine to do this for a nation and for cities. With such a good as the object of our inquiry,
we may call our study political science. (1094b7-11)
LS: Yes, that is not bad. “And the enterprise, the inquiry strives for these things, goes
after these things; and our enterprise is a kind of political science.” This is a grave
qualification. This “kind”: (in Greek, tis) corresponds to what Socrates does in the
Gorgias somewhere; he says that he alone is the true politician in Athens. xix Now the true
politician, that is the same as not being a politician, surely not an ordinary politician. And
similarly, this political science which Aristotle exhibits in this work is in a sense political
science. But only in one sense; in other ways, it’s not. Now what the difference is we
must gradually see.
Now as for the word “city” here—polis, in Greek—let us translate it by “city” all the
time, and not by “state” nor by “city-state.” And if someone is compelled to think of Wall
Street or Threadneedle Street when he hears of city, then he must change his habits. That
is not too much to [ask]. Otherwise we will not really understand what Aristotle is talking
about. There is no state there. State is a term which arises with Machiavelli or about that
time. It didn’t exist then. The Romans also didn’t have a word for state—it was civitas,
the collective of the citizens, which is fundamentally the same as polis. The modern
equivalent to what Aristotle or the Greeks altogether understood by polis is country and
not the state. The country. I mean, not merely—for example, also the emotional
implications which especially the country has do not belong to the state. The state is, as
Nietzsche said and President de Gaulle repeated, “a cold monster.” xx Only I think de
Gaulle meant as a compliment [laughter] what Nietzsche meant as something shocking.
But the country is nothing cold, and that is a polis. That the polis has something to do
with the state, there is no doubt about that, but we should nevertheless get some more
precise understanding of this difference.
Now the single highest telos, end, is the human good. But why should it be the object of
the political art? That could be questioned. We have here already an indication: is the
good, the best, the same for the individual and for the city? Perhaps that is not so; then
the highest art would not be called the political art. Aristotle says they are identical, but
there are so many qualifications, as you would see by reading the third and seventh books
of the Politics. Here, however, Aristotle assumes that the end of the two is the same. To
achieve and to preserve the human good for a nation or a city is more noble and more
divine than to do it for one man alone.
Now when Aristotle says here “a kind of politics” and previously he had spoken of
“politics,” that is also another point to consider. Formerly, in the first case, he spoke of
the art procuring and preserving the highest good, and that was the political art. But
Aristotle speaks now of his work, of his political or moral teaching, or whatever you call
xix

See Plato, Gorgias 521d.
In a speech on June 18, 1949, de Gaulle cited Nietzsche’s expression “das kälteste aller kalten
Ungeheuer” from Thus Spoke Zarathustra, book 1, “On the New Idol.” See “Discours
d’inauguration de l’avenue et de la porte du Général Leclerc,” in Charles de Gaulle, Discours et
messages II: Dans l’attente (1946-1958) (Paris: Plon, 1970), 296-300.
xx

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

32

it. And that is not simply political. It is political in a sense. Do you understand this
difference? The legislator: take the highest case. He elaborates a code for a given political
community. He is politically active to the highest degree. But the teacher of legislators,
surrounded by ten or twelve young people who give promise of becoming legislators: he
is not, as a teacher, politically active. He is a man in the classroom, in the study.
Therefore in the Middle Ages they made a distinction between the practical sciences
proper—like politics, economics, and so on—and theoretico–practical sciences, the
sciences which clarify the practical sciences and therefore are at one remove away from
the practical sciences. That is I think what Aristotle has in mind.
Now he mentions here nation (in Greek, ethnos) and polis. What is the relation, or order
of rank of nation and polis? What would you say—according to Aristotle, from your
knowledge, to the extent to which you have that?
Student: Now I would expect that he would think that the polis was higher.
LS: Yes, I think that is correct. But it is very interesting that Thomas Aquinas, in his
commentary on this passage, says that the nation is higher, because it contains many
cities.xxi I think that is one of the few interesting deviations of Thomas from his teacher,
Aristotle. Aristotle and other classical writers use frequently the expression “the cities
and the nations,” poleis kai ethnē. Then in this connection this means almost the same as
the Greeks and the barbarians, because the polis was more frequent among Greeks than
among the barbarians. Most of the barbarians lived in tribes. Perhaps one should translate
ethnos by tribe and not by nation, in order to avoid a certain modern connotations. Yes.
Now I believe we have to leave it at this point. Is there anyone who has a question or
objection which I can—Mr. Findlay?
Student: I wonder whether I could ask about something you mentioned on Monday,
when you spoke of—
LS: That would be a gross misuse of authority if I would say [that] what I discussed on
Monday will be discussed in class only on Monday. Yes?
Same Student: Insofar as you characterized modern science as being metaphysically
neutral, as compared with the ancients, is it not the case that, in a certain way, it supports
materialism rather than idealism?
LS: Yes, this is a point, you see. This they deny; and that is an interesting question,
because there was once a man called Lenin, of whom you must have heard, and he was a
materialist, and he said so. And then there were people who were surely not spiritualistic
or idealistic, but positivists. One very famous man among them was Ernst Mach, xxii with
all the history of mechanics. And this kind of people—and the school was called
empirio–criticism, but now they are called positivists. And Lenin wrote a fat book,
xxi
xxii

Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §30.
Ernst Mach (1838-1916), Austrian physicist and philosopher.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 2

33

although he was very active, as you know. Doing things [was] different then, writing
books. And he wrote this very fat book, xxiii and that was the point: that these people, these
modern positivists, interpreters of modern science denied the materialistic character of
modern science, and Lenin asserted it. If you want to back into the prehistory, one would
have to study Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason especially, in which it is shown that
modern natural science is true only of the phenomenal world, not of the noumenal world,
and [is] therefore radically nonmetaphysical. And the materialistic conclusions drawn
from science are invalid. It is of course a question, whether Kant is right or not. But this
is, one can say, the official view: that modern science is metaphysically neutral. And
some of the admirers of modern science and some of its critics assert that it is not
metaphysically neutral. There are people, for example, who say modern science
originated in Scholasticism in the fourteenth and fifteenth century. You may heard of
that.
Same Student: But insofar as materialism might be less than metaphysical in some
cases—
LS: Yes, sure. Now then if you take metaphysical in the older sense, then materialism is
of course not metaphysical because it denies that there is anything beyond nature or
behind nature.
Same Student: That would seem almost—
LS: Yes, but today the meaning of metaphysics has somewhat changed, and metaphysical
means, then, any assertion about the whole not supportable by scientific evidence. From
this point of view, Democritus’s doctrine of the atom is as metaphysical as the greatest
fancies of Plato. You know, this you have to consider. Yes?
Student: So you began by explaining that the subordination of the several arts to political
science means something very different today than it did for Aristotle. That the physicists
serve the government today means something quite different from the art of generalship
or any other art serving political science, being under political science in Aristotle. You
didn’t exactly conclude the explanation.
LS: I hope you forgive me if I say I am a bit tired now. Will you make a note of your
question and let me have it in writing at the beginning of the next one? Thank you.
1

Deleted “the.”
Deleted “where the one stops and the other begins.”
3
Deleted “for the same reason.”
4
Deleted “had.”
5
Moved “can.”
6
Deleted “all three of their practitioners.”
7
Moved “what Aristotle.”
2

xxiii

Vladimir Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

34

Session 3: February 19, 1968i
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —distinction is more important, that between materialists and
antimaterialists, or that between ancients and moderns, of which we spoke. According to
a very common view, the peculiarity of modernity is indicated by its origin: namely, its
Christian origin. Modernity is secularized Christianity. Seemingly heretical . . . but still of
Christian origin. You must have heard this quite frequently. Now regardless of whether
this explanation is correct or not, we cannot disregard it when trying to understand
Aristotle’s Ethics: the teaching of the Bible concerning human conduct and the source of
the Bible. The main point, which you all know: love of man. And God is a loving God;
God is love itself. This we must never forget when reading Aristotle, because there we
find an entirely different account from the biblical account, and if we do not try to
understand this profound difference, perhaps the most important of all differences, we
will unconsciously carry into Aristotle the views which are closest to us and which in a
way are the ones in which we have been brought up. That is all of us, not just Christians.
Now let us turn to our text, and [I] remind you of a point which came up at the conclusion
of the last meeting. And when Aristotle speaks here, in 1094b11, “our science, our
pursuit strives for these things, our pursuit being a kind of politics,” politikē tis ousa, of
the highest art, highest practical art, he had said that this is the political art. The political
art deals with the highest practical questions, in a sense with the highest human
questions. But what Aristotle does here is not simply the political art. Aristotle is no
Pericles, or Lysander, or whomever else you might take. Aristotle is a man addressing
potential legislators. He is not a legislator proper, and therefore his Ethics is not simply a
political book. And this applies also, by the way, to his Politics. But politikē tis, or to use
a scholastic–medieval distinction, his work here is not simply practical but theoretically
practical . . . what I said figuratively in an earlier meeting: I said that Aristotle looks in
the same direction as the citizen–statesman, but he looks further afield. And that is a notnegligible difference. In ordinary life it is perfectly sufficient to say, “Be decent,” or “Be
courageous,” whatever the subdivisions of decency may be. But Aristotle is very much
concerned with finding out what precisely is courage, what precisely is justice, which
may be quite good for practical purposes to know but quite a bit of decent practice gets
along very well without raising this kind of question.
Were you the one who had a question at the end of the last meeting?
Student: No.
LS: But still, there is no . . .
Same Student: Would Aristotle’s enterprise be more correctly termed propaedeutic or a
guidebook to the political art proper?
LS: No, I think it is more than merely propaedeutic; I think it claims to have a higher
dignity. In other words, [if it were merely propaedeutic], that would mean that Aristotle
says: I am the humble servant of future Theseuses, Romuluses, Pericleses, or what have
you. No, he claims to be more than that. We will soon find out more about it. Now let us
continue where we left off last time. Incidentally, who was the other one who had a
question? You were the one?
i

The original transcriber notes: “This lecture was taped from the audience, and as a result it is not
as clear as the other lectures in this series.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

35

Student: Yes. Well, the question was, we noticed that Aristotle says that political science
is the science which orders all of the arts which are practiced in the polis. Thus all science
is subordinated to political science. And we also noted that today (you pointed this out)
that today physicists are working in increasing numbers for the government, and there is
a sort of subordination of science to political science. But you noted there was a
difference, and I was wondering if you could explain that.
LS: Oh, I see. Well, Aristotle has not spoken of that here. That will come up later, in
book 6. The theoretical sciences are according to Aristotle not subject to the polis. But
physics as in the service of technology, military or not, is of course not simply a
theoretical science, and therefore the conclusions from the one to the other cannot so
easily be drawn. But for the time being, let us leave it at this position, that the political art
is the commanding art regarding all arts in contradistinction to theoretical science. The
theoretical sciences belong to a higher sphere than . . . The teacher of legislators, however
broadminded, could . . . prescribe what mathematicians, or physicists, or biologists
should do. And for Aristotle, the theoretical sciences have a higher rank. But we have not
yet reached this point. We are still sitting as good boys, or good girls, for that matter, at
the feet of the master of those who learn. We are trying to learn first what we can learn
from him.
Now up to this point Aristotle had spoken about the subject of his discourse. Now at
1094b11, he turns to the manner of his discourse. The distinction between subject and
manner should be clear. Or is this in need of explanation?
Student: It means method or something like that?
LS: No, the manner. For example, you can treat the same subject in different manners;
for example, for beginners and for advanced students. Is this is intelligible? You can treat
it in a popular manner and in a very rigid academic manner. Is this clear? And other
distinctions which would apply.
So he devoted about thirty-nine lines, in the edition which I use, to the subject of his
discourse. He will devote about twenty-nine lines to the manner of his discourse. You see
from this mere statistical fact that the manner of speaking is very important to Aristotle.
Very important to Aristotle. And now let us begin at the beginning of this section. Mr.
Wedergreen?
Reader:
Now our treatment of this science will be adequate, if it achieves that amount of precision
which belongs to its subject matter. The same exactness must not be expected in all
departments of philosophy alike, any more than in all the products of the arts and crafts.
(1094b11-14)
LS: Let’s stop here. “Exactness must not be expected in all speeches, as little as in all
products of the manual arts.” Yes. Well, take such an expression like “precision
instruments.” Obviously they have a higher degree of precision than nonprecision
instruments. And we expect different degrees of precision in different spheres. Now this
term “precision” or “exact,” akribes in Greek, is called in the old Latin translation
“certo,” from which the English certitude is derived. In the Renaissance translation, it is
translated subtiles, subtle. And it is very interesting that the Greek word can equally well
be translated by “certain” as by “subtle,” two words which for us have entirely different
meanings, as one can illustrate most simply by the example of Pascal, who opposed to
each other the spirit of geometry (in a way, geometry means mathematics) and on the

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

36

other hand the spirit of finesse, of subtlety. ii So this was a clear opposition by that time
and it has remained up to the present day, hence the talk of the two cultures, the culture of
exactness and the culture of subtlety. But in the original meaning of the Greek word, this
distinction has not yet been as pronounced. A Greek temple is built with the greatest
precision, as well-known classical hyperboles . . . This precision is not simply to be
reduced to mathematical precision but has also to do with the purpose of the temple. So is
the Sophoclean tragedy or an Aristophanean comedy. “Nothing haphazard” is also a
principle of precision. What degree of precision is to be expected depends on the subject
matter, on the hylē, as Aristotle says here, which is literally translated as “wood”: that out
of which a thing is made, and is then traditionally translated by “matter,” also in the sense
of subject matter. For example, different exactness would be expected of an artisan
working on marble, or on clay, or on wood. And this also applies with the necessary
changes to the subject matter in the somewhat metaphoric sense, as distinguished from
the matter strictly and sensually perceived. Now let us go on.
Reader:
The subjects studied by political science are Moral Nobility and Justice; but these
conceptions involve much difference of opinion and uncertainty, so that they are
sometimes believed to be mere conventions and to have no real existence in the nature of
things.
LS That I think we should translate a bit more precisely: “The noble and the just things,
about which the political art makes its inquiries, have great differences of one another
and confusion, so that they seem to be only by convention and in no way by nature.”
Yes?
Reader:
And a similar uncertainty surrounds the conception of the Good—
LS: There is no “conception,” of course. The word doesn’t exist here. Why make things
unnecessarily complicated and create the appearance of learning by speaking all the time
of conception?
Reader: I don’t know.
LS: It must be beautiful when they drink a glass of beer [and] would say
“conception” . . . which I believe they wouldn’t say.
Reader: I don’t know.
LS: Yes. One cannot know. Now?
Reader:
because it frequently occurs that good things have harmful consequences: people have
before now been ruined by wealth, and in other cases courage has cost men their lives.
(1094b14-19)
LS: Yes. Well, “before now some have actually come to ruin through wealth and others
through courage.” You see what he does with Aristotle’s conciseness, unnecessarily. But
let us not draw too much attention to that. What he means here, of course, in the last part
of the sentence is this: everyone would say, without trying to be subtle, “Well, these are
ii

Blaise Pascal, Pensées (1670), 21-22.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

37

good things. Courage is a good thing. Now look how many men have been ruined by
their wealth.” Is this not intelligible, that some people are ruined by their wealth? And
some have been ruined by their courage: namely, they volunteer for all kinds of
dangerous things, and they are ruined. That’s popular and . . .
Now what degree of exactness is to be expected in the present inquiry, which is a kind of
political inquiry? That is now the question, and therefore we must look at the subject
matter of the present inquiry. And this subject matter consists of two kinds, and that is of
crucial importance. The first is called “the noble and just things,” and the second is called
“the good things.” Very much depends on your grasping this distinction. The noble and
the just things correspond to what we would call today the moral things or the ethical
things. The noble and the just things. And you can understand the difference between the
noble and [the] just most simply as follows (this is a very provisional explanation): just
things are the matters which you are obliged to do, which it is your duty to do, it is just
for you to do; and the noble things are in a way beyond the call of duty. This is not
literally true, but as a provisional explanation and as indicating that there is still some
intelligibility of this distinction in our way of thinking . . . Now the good things are the
good things. Two were mentioned here: wealth and courage. There are many
more . . . But they are not in that way moral in which the noble and just things are.
Now regarding the noble and just things, Aristotle says there is a great variety, a great
discord. This word occurs at the very beginning of the work, as you may recall (line 3 of
the whole work): “comes to sight some variety, some difference, some discord of the
ends.” Here he repeats this, but with a bang: “there is a great discord and confusion
regarding the noble and just things.” Only now does Aristotle speak explicitly not merely
of variety, but of the chaos in the moral world. Well, this chaos you know of course
through present-day relativism, and there it becomes a matter of course about which
nothing has to be said except to take it as a safe and sound starting point, which is not
Aristotle’s way of . . .
Now what corresponds to relativism in our age was in classical antiquity what we can call
conventionalism. And that is defined here: the noble and just things are only “by
convention,” and in no way “by nature.” The difference between conventionalism and
present-day relativism is this: conventionalism is guided by the distinction between the
conventional and the natural. And the old-fashioned conventionalists admitted of course
that there are things by nature good: for example, to have a sane mind, a healthy body,
[and] food are simple examples; and to have good friends, good children, good parents.
These are of course things which are by nature good, which everyone in his senses would
desire, and this is in no way conventional, whereas whether there should be polygamy or
monogamy, or whether there should be community of property or not: this would be,
according to the conventionalist view, a matter of convention. It depends on the society
for which of the various alternatives it opts.
But there is a sphere in which no such human preference or tossing of coins is relevant,
and this concerns the things good by nature. Nevertheless, Aristotle goes on to suggest,
there is some such confusion also regarding the good things. But no one says, I note in
passing, that the good things are good merely by convention. That no one would suggest.
Yet we can say the good things are ambiguous: we think they are simply good, especially
when we are inexperienced, and then we find out gradually that they are not always good.
For example, wealth: desirable for someone poor, so that some people think, “If we had
more money, everything would be fine,” and they find out later on that this was a
delusion. The same would be true, speaking crudely and superficially, as we do all the
time now, of courage. Wasn’t it wonderful to have courage and to face all kinds of
dangers? Well, look: X did have this admirable quality, and then he was killed,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

38

unnecessarily, because of it. So the same thing would seem to apply, at first glance, to all
good things. There is a chapter in Xenophon’s Memorabilia, book 4, chapter 2, which we
might read, where this is beautifully and simply explained by Socrates himself to a young
man called Euthydemus, for example, that even wisdom—which was surely regarded by
Socrates as a very great good—that even wisdom can be damaging. For example,
Socrates uses there the example of a fellow who was kidnapped because of his wisdom.
The Persian king wanted to have him . . . [laughter] so you know the good things are not
as unambiguously good as inexperienced people might be inclined to think.
Now what is implied here also is that the good things, as good things, are fundamentally
superior to the noble and just things. And this to begin with is very hard for us to
understand. It has something to do with that comment I stated on an earlier occasion
diagrammatically, and I will repeat that, because I . . . [LS writes on the blackboard.]
Here is the social scientist, or whatever you call that. In the wide sense Aristotle too
would be a social scientist. Here he looks toward the noble and just things. And then it is
possible to look further afield, and this would still be the same perspective. That is what
Aristotle would say. And then there is another possibility: to look at this whole dimension
from the outside, as a spectator. These are fundamental alternatives. And now the
superiority of the good to the noble and just has something to do with this shift of
perspective from this to this. [LS refers to the blackboard.] This is for the time being
perhaps wholly unintelligible, but I know from long experience that a teacher must
sometimes throw some seeds and hope that they will sprout. Good.
Only one illustration for the time being, which is not more than an illustration and
perhaps a poor one. In Plato’s Republic, mention is made of the idea of the good, the
highest thing. The good is said to be, or the idea of the good is said to be superior to the
ideas of the just and of the noble. That is also Aristotle’s view, although he would not
express it in these terms. Now Mr Wedergreen?
Reader:
We must therefore be content if, in dealing with subjects and starting from premises thus
uncertain, we succeed in presenting a broad outline of the truth: when our subjects and
our premises are merely generalities, it is enough if we arrive at generally valid
conclusions. (1094b19-22)
LS: Yes. “Generally” here understood in contradistinction to “universal,” not in the sense
of “abstract.” So Aristotle begins now to raise the question, after he has made clear that
the subject matter of politics is singularly chaotic, disorderly: how shall we speak about
it? “Rather rudely and crudely,” so we can interpret what Aristotle says. In other words,
we should be satisfied with rules of thumb rather than with mathematical propositions,
with quite a few if’s and but’s. And that means generally, not universally. No rules here
without exception. Take an example. Aristotle makes clear in his Politics that one of the
fundamental facts of the polis is the distinction between the rich and the poor, iii a
distinction which is so little peculiar to Aristotle that, for example, Machiavelli makes
also very much of it. [It is] elemental. But is this a precise distinction? It obviously
depends very much on the total wealth of the society and on the relative distribution of
wealth within the society. So that is not an exact distinction but yet a very powerful one
which we must not forget.
Or take the good man: the man of integrity, as he would be called today. Now how
deeply should we look into his heart before we pronounce a man “a man of perfect
iii

This is a central theme of book 5 of the Politics.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

39

integrity”? And so Aristotle says: “Not too deeply.” That’s briefly Aristotle’s answer. We
judge him from his actions, and if he has constantly behaved decently throughout his life,
then we pronounce him a perfect gentleman. As for his intentions: Aristotle says they are
immanifest, and therefore you can’t say anything about them. But on the other hand, can
we be satisfied with external correctitude, even if [it extends] throughout the whole of
life? Difficult questions, if’s and but’s.
Now since we start in our present inquiry from premises which are true only generally,
i.e., admitting exceptions, our conclusions will be only general as well, as should be
clear. Take another example: generals ought to be men of great bodily vigor. Yet in one
particular case there may be a very gouty old general who may have much more strategic
acumen than the young generals. Naturally, a very sensible man would say, “Let us
choose this gouty old general,” against the rule, which is generally sound, that vigorous
young men . . . So I think that is not difficult to understand. Now Aristotle goes on in this
discussion.
Reader:
Accordingly we may ask the student also to accept the various views we put forward in
the same spirit; for it is the mark of an educated mind to expect that amount of exactness
in each kind which the nature of the particular subject admits. It is equally unreasonable
to accept merely probable conclusions from a mathematician and to demand strict
demonstration from an orator.
Again, each man judges correctly those matters with which he is acquainted; it is of these
that he is a competent critic. To criticize—
LS: Let us try to avoid technical terms when simple terms will do. “Critic” is a
deliberative term, isn’t it? Kritēs is “judge.”
Reader: “Judge”?
LS: Yes.
Reader:
To criticize or to judge a particular subject, therefore, a man must have been trained in
that subject: to be a good judgeiv generally, he must have had an all-around education.
(1094b22-1095a2)
LS: Yes. Now let us stop here for a moment. So Aristotle raises now the question, not
[of] how to speak about the subject matter, but [of] how to accept such speeches. First, he
had spoken, as it were, of what the speaker, the teacher, should do. Now we see . . . about
the hearers or the students. What the listener or reader should expect or demand in each
case or kind of case [is] the exactness which the nature of the matter permits. The
extremes would be the mathematician and the orator. From the mathematician, you would
not be satisfied if he would say, “By God, that is so!” But in the case of the orator, it
might very well be very conclusive if in a given part of the speech he says so. I think if
you would make a study of political speeches, you will see that oaths or their equivalents
are very persuasive, or can be very persuasive in public speech. But not in mathematics.
And some of the jokes which Plato permits in his dialogues are where he makes

iv

In Rackham’s translation: “To criticize a particular subject, therefore, a man must have been
trained in that subject: to be a good critic.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

40

sometimes questions be decided by Zeus. The swearing, say, of Glaucon in the Republic
would add an atom of truth to the disquisition. So that is clear.
Well, we could perhaps illustrate by a modern example taken from Machiavelli.
Machiavelli’s Prince begins with a chapter which is rather dry and dull. It’s a kind of
scholastic division, rationing sequence of divisions, and then it ends with a quotation
from a patriotic Italian poem. Now perhaps one could say what Machiavelli suggests is
that the proper posture of the student of politics consists in the proper mixture of
academic dryness and patriotic fervor . . . You could not use such a mixture in
mathematics, although maybe in biology. But in the study of human, political things, it
would make sense.
Now in order to demand the right kind or degree of exactness or precision, one must
know the nature of the subject matter, or one must know the genus with which the
science in question deals. One does not have to be a scientist in order to do that. Aristotle
uses here the term “the educated man.” The educated man is a dilettante. He’s not a man
of science; [he has] the particular kind of second-hand familiarity with the subject matter
compared with that of the true man of science. And the highest possibility on this level is
the man who has an all-round education, something which we can no longer expect in our
age but which in former times was of course possible when there was much less
specialization and much less focus.
So Aristotle has here stated again in general terms the question: what about the spirit in
which to expect or accept speeches? And now he turns again to the question at hand: how
to accept or what to expect of speeches regarding our present subject matter? Will you go
on, please?
Reader:
Hence the young are not fit to be students of Political Science. For they have no
experience of life and conduct, and it is these that supply the premises and subject matter
of this inquiry.v And moreover they are led by their feelings; so that they will study—
LS: “Passions.” Well, you could also say “feelings,” but the usual translation of pathos is
“passion.”
Reader:
so that they will study the subject to no purpose or advantage, since the end of this
science is not knowledge but action. And it makes no difference whether they are young
in years or immature in character: the defect is not a question of time, it is because their
life and its various aims are guided by passion;vi for to such persons their knowledge is of
no use, any more than it is to persons of defective selfish incontinence. vii But Moral
Science may be of great value to those who guide their desires and actions by principle.
(1095a2-11)
LS: Of course Aristotle doesn’t say “moral science,” nor does he say “political science.”
He says in Greek hē politikē, to which you can add the noun technē, for example: “the
political art.” You can also add to hē politikē, dynamis: “the political ability.” It is not so
hard and fast, these things in Aristotle, as the translators . . . make.

v

In Rackham’s translation: “this branch of philosophy.”
In Rackham’s translation: “feeling.”
vii
In Rackham’s translation: “defective self-restraint.”
vi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

41

Now who are then the proper hearers of what we could now call “ethics”? Perhaps
“ethics” is better than “ethical science,” because the claim is somewhat different when
you speak of “ethics” than when you speak of “ethical science.” Now the proper hearers
of ethics are not the young. And I do not know what I have to say here [laughter], but I
can assume that part of you are graduate students, and that surely all of you are beyond
high school. And “the young” means here, as Aristotle says immediately, “those who lack
self-control.” And he gives two reasons. First, young people lack experience, and
secondly, young people generally speaking lack self-control. They will not learn, they
will not listen properly, because their passions blind them. If someone has a very strong
desire for something, then he doesn’t listen to reasons which tell him he is wrong to
desire that or to strive for that. I don’t think that I have to labor this point, because all of
you have read some novels and you know . . .
One may say, going a bit beyond what Aristotle here explicitly says, that the proper
hearer or student must already be a perfect gentleman . . . Aristotle does not do the job
which Plato or Socrates does in the Republic on Thrasymachus, who is not a perfect
gentleman and doesn’t claim to be one, and Socrates refutes him, or in the Gorgias on
Callicles. Aristotle says, in other words, “I am not going to refute the immoralists, the
people who say the just and noble things are merely conventional. I don’t talk to such
people.” Now this seems to be a very arbitrary procedure. But nevertheless, let us see
what . . .
If we take first the contemporary example: there is now much talk of freedom of love, I
believe they call it, by which they mean complete sexual freedom. Now Aristotle would
say: are young people competent regarding this subject? Can they know the grave
consequences for the whole of life . . . Or to take a simpler case, where there would be no
controversy among us: are three-year-old children competent to judge regarding matches?
The application of one to the other example, I leave to you. The point which Aristotle
makes here, which I must emphasize: the end which Aristotle pursues in this book is not
knowledge but action. [LS raps on the table.] In other words, he is not concerned, at least
not primarily concerned, with reaching an understanding of the moral things, the just and
noble, but with making, within the limits of the possible,1 men better men, men more
noble andjust. That is the end. Whether one needs for this purpose an understanding of
what nobility and what justice is from the point of view of the outside observer, we are
not yet in a position to say.
Now let us read, then. Aristotle has drawn our attention very forcefully to the moral
chaos which leads to the fact that people say the noble and just things are only
conventional. One could say, being harsh on Aristotle or nasty to him, that the moral
chaos disappears or ceases to be terrible by virtue of experience of life and of control of
the passions. Or perhaps more simply, he will only talk to people who have fulfilled this
condition. Now the other side of it, the degenerate, the sensualist side will come to sight
soon enough. Now in the next sentence . . .
Reader:
Let so much suffice by way of introduction as to the student of the subject, the spirit in
which our conclusions are to be received, and the object that we set before us. (1095a1113)
LS: This is important, because it says what we have read hitherto was only an
introduction, [a] prooemium. And later on we’ll go on. But first, let us have a discussion
before we go on. So this was an entirely provisional discussion, a prooemium, indicating
the subject matter and indicating the spirit in which it will be treated and in which the
treatment must be accepted by the young. There must be quite a few questions.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

42

Student: Yes, I’ve got a couple. First, is this a prologue also to the Politics, or is it only
to the Ethics?
LS: Well, I would say only to this work, because there is a special transition at the end of
this work to the Politics, and then there is a new beginning made in the Politics.
Same Student: Yes.
LS: But since the two works belong together, you can also say that it is simply the
beginning of this whole dual enterprise: Ethics and Politics, and the prooemium to that.
Same Student: But I was thinking of what you’re saying about politikē tis being, say, the
art of the teacher of legislators or something like that.
LS: “A kind of political inquiry” would be the literal translation.
Same Student: Yes. Later on, in the sixth book, when he exposes politikē alone, he
seems to say that it is a part of prudence. Would politikē tis also be a kind of prudence?
LS: Yes, but at a second remove. This will become clear. First of all, we have to wait for
book 6, where he speaks about prudence and the relation of prudence and politics. And
one [issue] which Aristotle does not develop there, as far as I remember, but which was
developed by the scholastics of the Middle Ages, was this difference: that the teacher of
political prudence is not as such a political man. For example, the political man always
has to consider the opposition and the present situation. The teacher of politics in general
doesn’t have to do that. There is no opposition in that way, because the scholars who
contradict him are not in opposition in the political sense, or at least that’s what he hopes.
Same Student: But isn’t the teacher of, say, legislators in some sense a political man,
let’s say because he has to deal with particular legislators.
LS: That is a very difficult question. But as a teacher of legislators, he would establish
the principles of legislation, which would be, rightly understood, universally valid. Not
universally valid in the sense in which Bentham would have been a teacher of legislators,
but in the sense that he would consider the alternative: say, this is the most desirable; this
is the second [most] desirable, third [most] desirable, and so on. But he would not deal
with Athens, or Sparta, or Corinth but with aristocracy, democracy, oligarchy and the
different kinds of regimes. And he could in principle be nameless, whereas an actual
politician of course has himself a name, a proper name and belongs to a city with a proper
name and has to do with adversaries with proper names. Is this [clear]?
Same Student: Yes.
LS: So in other words, Aristotle’s Ethics is in between a strictly practical pursuit [and a
strictly theoretical pursuit]. A strictly practical pursuit is what Aristotle did in order to
have the means of living for himself [and] for his friends. That’s practical. But when he
reasons generally about how to get money, then in that respect he is of course no longer a
practical man. The economist, the teacher of management of the household, is not as such
a manager of the household. Was this not intelligible?
Same Student: Yes.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

43

LS: Today we have the other pole, where the practical sciences have completely
disappeared. May I mention this in passing? We have today a distinction between the
theoretical and the applied sciences, and the applied sciences are sciences which
presuppose the pure or theoretical sciences. In Aristotle the applied sciences play no role.
But for him what is decisive is the distinction between theoretical and practical sciences.
And the practical sciences do not presuppose the theoretical sciences. How this is
possible, we will try to understand. There are also difficulties here, no doubt, but prima
facie this is simply true. Now Mr. . . .
Student: It would seem that the qualifications for the good, or only appropriate student
of Aristotle’s Ethics, are conjoined in old men, since they have had the experience and
they are also by nature less susceptible to the passions.
LS: May I suggest a slight correction? Mature. [Laughter]
Same Student: Well, there’s a problem there, but—
LS: If it were only for old men, it would be a pity. And little need.
Same Student: Well, that’s just the question I wanted to ask, because it would seem that
as men become more receptive to the teaching, their ability to improve their actions with
respect to justice and nobility has correspondingly decreased.
LS: Because you can’t teach an old dog new tricks.
Same Student: Among other reasons, and also that their active lives are behind them, to
a large extent.
LS: No. Therefore I suggest that [you] replace old by “mature,” and you will have what
Aristotle says, and your objection would cease to be valid.
Same Student: Well, I’m not so sure, because in practice one can’t readily imagine a
mature man, who was busily engaged in practical activities, taking the time out to read
Aristotle.
LS: That is not true. I have an empirical proof to demonstrate it. There was a very
remarkable man, a more than remarkable man, in our age: Winston Churchill. And he had
a friend, Lord Birkenhead. His name prior to his being raised to the peerage was Smith; I
forgot his initials.viii And this Lord Birkenhead was a lawyer and a very witty man, of
which Churchill gives some examples. And on one occasion or another, Birkenhead gave
Churchill this book to read [LS raps on the table], of course in English translation. And
Churchill was already at that time in 2 [his] forties. Churchill read it and said, “That is
more or less as I always thought [of] these things.” Churchill didn’t say that he derived
any benefit from it.ix That he didn’t say, but I believe he was too busy to derive any
benefit from it. But at least he saw here is that made explicit, what he and Birkenhead and
some other people felt was the good man.

viii

F. E. Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead (1872-1930), British politician.
ix
See C. E. Bechhofer Roberts, Winston Churchill, being an Account of the Life of the Right Hon.
Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill, P.C., C.H., T.D., M.P. (London: Mills & Boon, Ltd., 1927),
102.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

44

Same Student: But it’s precisely the benefit that Aristotle is concerned with, not simply
the knowledge.
LS: Sure, that is true. But why don’t you take people—there was an expression used in
Athens, which you surely have heard: “people who mind their own business.” Now by
this was understood people of independent means—unfortunately, that was necessary—
people of independent means or who had friends of independent means . . . and who were
without political ambition. That was the meaning [of] minding one’s own business. These
people of course had plenty of time to go to the Lyceum or wherever Aristotle gave
lectures or Plato gave lectures, and to listen to them. There is no difficulty in that.
If you raise now the question whether such books are not wholly valueless, the question
which in a way Machiavelli raised when he said he wanted to create political science in
accordance with how men actually lived, i.e., not as perfect gentlemen, then of course
you could throw this book away. It’s useless. But I believe you will get into theoretical
troubles . . . Practical probably not, given the state of scientific powers now in the present
day. But you will get into theoretical troubles.
At any rate, even if this other view, the Machiavellian view, were true, it would be
absolutely necessary to understand the alternative; otherwise we simply are blind
followers of Machiavelli. And we want to understand his reasoning: to what extent is this
right? And therefore we have to know the position from which he retreats.
Same Student: It seems to me that precisely our view is one of seeking knowledge,
whereas if we believe Aristotle, to a certain extent that view is inimical to . . .
LS: You can say that. That is a very good point. In other words, we, especially the
younger ones among you, are in a situation in which we hear two kinds of sirens. On the
one side there are those who repeat more or less well what Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle
taught; and then there are the others, who repeat more or less what Thrasymachus,
Callicles, and such people said. And therefore you cannot, or we cannot say: “We are
nice people and we will simply only listen to nice men.” We cannot do that. The power of
the non-nice people—or as they are sometimes called, the bad guys—is so strong that we
have to take this position of the observer. That is true. But we must never forget that
Aristotle’s primary position is not that [of the observer]. And we must be careful to see
what the advantages are that go with Aristotle[’s position]. Now let us go on and read the
very beginning of 1095a14. “Let us speak after having taken up the subject.” Yes?
Reader:
To resume, inasmuch as all studies and undertakings are directed to the attainment of
some good—
LS: Let us stop here. Now Aristotle repeats here, as you see, the very beginning of the
work but simplifying it greatly, because he speaks now only of every knowledge and
moral choice. He does not make this division into four, which in a way . . . We may use
this occasion for noticing that in good writers repetitions are as a rule never literal
repetitions, but always nonliteral. At any rate, Aristotle continues, but he continues while
repeating. And now let us begin where we began now and read a few more lines.
Reader:
let us discuss what it is that we pronounce to be the aim of Politics, that is, what is the
highest of all the goods that action can achieve. As far as the name goes, we may almost
say that the great majority of mankind are agreed about this— (1095a14-18)

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

45

LS: Let us stop here. It is settled that the human ability dealing with the highest good is
the political one, [the] political ability. But it deals only with the highest of the good
things to be achieved by action. And here you see a distinction only between choice and
knowledge. Aristotle takes now for granted that there is a single highest good, taught here
partly on the basis of that parallelism between the ends and the arts. Do you remember?
And there is a variety of ends, there is an infinite variety of ends, and there is an infinite
variety of arts that produce ends. Yet among the arts we find a hierarchy, and therefore
we have the right to assume a hierarchy also among the ends. Moreover, among the arts
we find one architectonic art, one art ruling all others: the political art. And therefore we
are entitled to assume that there is a good thing which is a product of this political art.
That was the previous argument. Now what did you want to say?
Another Student: I want to ask you: he said before that the spoudaios is the only true
student of politikē, so he only talks to the spoudaioi. Is it fair to say, on the other side,
that he only talks about the spoudaioi? In other words, that the hierarchy of goods, the
way he approaches it, can exist only if the men who seek goods are in effect sincere in
seeking the highest good? Does the classification work only with spoudaioi?
LS: Not quite. When somebody assumes the subordination of the art of shipbuilding to
the art of sailing . . . must be recognized by the greatest . . .
Same Student: That’s another thing. That’s a very simple example. What if we take
something a little more complicated, like two men differing on a piece of legislation?
One says the good is A, the other says the good is something else, perhaps even not-A. Is
it fair to say that the goods—actually both have the highest good inherent in them, as
Aristotle would say, if the men both sincerely aim at it. In other words, they both may be
wrong, but they must aim at the highest one in order to be related to it.
LS: Aristotle, I believe, would not attach this importance to sincerity, because sincerity
can go together with great blindness.
Same Student: With great blindness, yes.
LS: And great obstinacy, and so which would not—
Student: Sincerity is a simply term, but the attitude and the content of the spoudaios
concerned—
LS: They would agree in principle, surely, on all matters of principle. But since practical
matters are of this great variety, there are many cases where decent men can disagree.
And that is clear: ways and means must be found, lest this disagreement leads to
dissolution of the body politic. That goes without saying. But disagreements, especially
concrete questions, are coeval with political life of any complexity. Now let us then
continue where we left off.
Reader:
For both the multitude and persons of refinement speak of it as Happiness, and conceive
‘the good life’ or ‘doing well’ to be the same thing as ‘being happy.’ (1095a18-20)
LS: Yes. Now hitherto, to repeat, we knew that there is a highest good in this indirect
way: because there is a highest art. But we didn’t see this highest good itself, only its
object. But regarding this object, we have learned in the meantime that it consists of the
noble and just things on the one hand, and the good things on the other, and there is great
complexity there. So that is not very helpful.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

46

Now Aristotle makes a new beginning and, as it were, he grabs at a straw. There is a
word which all men use for designating the highest good, and this word is in Greek
eudaimonia. This is a point which is not negligible, but of course not decisive, because
names may be used equivocally. The cleavage among men is that between the many and
the men of refinement or grace, charientes. And there is a cleavage, but they all agree as
to the name, and they agree moreover as to this: that eudaimonia—having a good demon
or being guided by a good demon—is the same as doing well, and the ambiguity of doing
well, acting well, or just faring well . . . and living well. There is no doubt that all
men . . . There is no man in his senses who doesn’t wish to live well, to do well, and to be
happy. But unfortunately there is a great variety of opinions as to what happiness is, of
which he speaks in the sequel. Now?
Reader:
But what constitutes happiness is a matter of dispute; and the popular account of it is not
the same as that given by the philosophers.
LS: Oh no. “The wise men.” They make it all too technical. Now he speaks of the wise
men where he had spoken before of the men of refinement or grace, and the two terms are
here synonymously used, the same thing. So while all men agree as to the name of it,
what is happiness? And there you see is this profound disagreement between the many
and the wisest. Yes?
Reader:
Ordinary people identify it with some obvious and visible good, such as pleasure or
wealth or honour—some say one thing and some say another, indeed, very often the same
man says different things at different times: when he falls sick he thinks health is
happiness, when he is poor, wealth. At other times, feeling conscious of their own
ignorance, men admire those who propound something grand and above their heads—
LS: Yes. So opinions of the many—well, you are all familiar with this view, that a man
thinks at one time, “If I only got rid of this pneumonia!” or whatever it may be, and that
is the only thing of importance to him, and then after he is well, he doesn’t pay any
attention to his health any more. That is very clear.
The last point may refer to something like initiations into Eleusian or other Mysteries.
Now others have higher views; neither honor, nor wealth, nor health is the thing, but
some grand things, high above them. Yes?
Reader:
And it has been held by some thinkers that beside the many good things we have
mentioned, there exists another Good, that is good in itself, and stands to all those goods
as the cause of their being good. (1095a20-28)
LS: Well, the reference . . . to Plato, or let us say to Platonists: there is one good thing
which is the cause also of all these good things mentioned before, like health, wealth, and
so on.
Now Aristotle—this is the sole example he gives of the opinions of wise men. And he
reports here two kinds of opinions, two faulty extremes: the view of the vulgar and the
false view of a wise man. The right mean is not mentioned here because he must show a
cause why neither of the two views, [the] two possibilities is sufficient. Yes?
Reader:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

47

Now perhaps it would be a somewhat fruitless task to review all the different opinions
that are held. It will suffice to examine those that are most widely held x or that seem to
have some argument in their favour.
LS: Well, in practice this means—I mean, this is of course an absolutely sound
statement: you cannot discuss all opinions. In practice for Aristotle, it means that he will
not try to refute Callicles, or Thrasymachus for that matter. And this is of some
importance. All right, now go on.
Reader:
And we must not overlook the distinction between arguments that start from first
principles and those that lead to first principles. It was a good practice—
LS: Why does he say “first”? Say “principles.” There are so many principles around
nowadays that you must make this distinction. It was not so in Aristotle’s day. Now let us
see up to the—yes, the next sentence.
Reader:
It was a good practice of Plato to raise this question, and to enquire whether the right
procedure was to start from or to lead up to the principles, xi as in a—
LS: “Procedure”—in Greek: “the way is.” “The way is to the principles or from them.”
Yes?
Reader:
as in a race-course one may run from the judges to the far end of the track or the other
way around.xii
LS: Yes. Let us stop here. Aristotle now gives the reason why one cannot give a reason
for everything, we can say. And that is the rest of this chapter. There are two ways in
which we can say: from the principles, down (let us call this descent), and up to the
principles (let us call this ascent). And let us avoid these technical terms like induction
and deduction, which do more harm than good. The question is: which way will Aristotle
go in his Ethics, from the principles down, or up to the principles? And the distinction to
which he refers here was made by Plato. It does not occur as far as I know in this form in
the Platonic dialogues, but it must have been a very common use of Plato in his
conversations. Now go on.
Reader:
Now no doubt it is proper to start from the known. But ‘the known’ has two meanings—
‘what is known to us,’ which is one thing, and ‘what is knowable in itself,’ which is
another. Perhaps then for us at all events it is proper to start from what is known to us.
(1095a28-b4)
LS: Yes, let us stop here. This is a bit of a joke. We—we humans—perhaps should start
from what is known to humans . . . the context. We must start either from what is known
to us or from what is known simply, absolutely. The preposition used here, apo in Greek,
seems to indicate that he will proceed by way of descent. He seems to replace
“principles” by “known,” although—things known—and drawing our attention, however,
x

In Rackham’s translation: “most widely prevalent.”
In Rackham’s translation: “first principles.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “or reversely.”
xi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

48

to [the fact] that there are two kinds of things known: known to us or known in itself,
meaning tacitly presupposed by us but not yet understood, so not yet realized. But
starting from what is known to us would seem to lead to what is known by itself. Starting
from what is known to us would then mean starting from the facts as distinguished from
the principles or highest causes. Does Aristotle then say we should start from what is
known to us in order to arrive eventually at the principles? Is this the procedure? Let us
read the sequel.
Reader:
This is why in order to be a competent student of the Right and Just—
LS: “Noble and just.”
Reader:
and in short of the topics of Politics in general, the pupil is bound to have been well
trained in his habits. For the starting-point or first principle is the fact that a thing is so; if
this be satisfactorily ascertained, there will be no need also to know the reason why it is
so. And the man of good moral training knows first principles already, or can easily
acquire them. (1095b4-8)
LS: Yes. Now Aristotle seems here to say: No, we do not start from facts in order to
arrive eventually at the principles, for the fact—the “that” in Greek—is principle itself.
Hence, no need for the why. No need for the why. There is no need for the why, no need
for the principles in the sense of the term previously used. For example, someone can say
that . . . in Horace, “It is sweet and becoming to die for the fatherland,” xiii is an example
of such a fact. The well brought-up man knows that, and there is no need for any reason.
And he—starting from such maxims represented by the poem, and perhaps even “honesty
is the best policy,” if you want. Such maxims which gradually build up in a man through
the course of his education and his experience, that is all that is needed. A man who sees
the that—xiv In other words, what Aristotle seems to say is this: a man who sees the
“that”—take the example from Horace, or however you want—the man who sees the
“that” is and/or is not by this very fact in possession of the “why.” One couldn’t be more
ambiguous. The well-bred man surely knows that this or that is noble or just, but he does
not know why these things are just or noble. More precisely, even granting that he knows
why they are just and noble, does he know that they are good? Because that was exactly
the point of these bad guys, Thrasymachus and the others, that they said there are of
course noble and just things, but they are not good.
And the real question, the first question, would be [whether] noble and just things are
good or not. The question is: will the well-brought up young man, or mature man, learn3
from Aristotle that they are good? At any rate, Aristotle addresses only decent people.
That is made clear, I think, here more than before, people who admit that one ought to be
decent, or that decency is good. Does Aristotle beg the decisive question by not arguing
this out too? Does he argue in a circle, in other words, presupposing decency and never
go out of this charming circle of decency? Perhaps this is necessary. And there is a
simple reflection which can show the plausibility, at least, of his approach. A man, young
or old, who raises this question which theoretically seems to be so plausible, “Why
should I be decent?” has already ceased to be decent, so that to raise this question is
incompatible with decency. He cannot have . . . there is at a certain place a jump from
neutrality, from nondecency to decency, and a jump without which we could never enter
xiii
xiv

Horace, Odes 3.2.13.
There is a break in the tape at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

49

this dimension. The situation is a bit more complicated than that, but still it is necessary
to make this point. And now let us read the conclusion of this chapter.
Reader:
As for the person who neither knows nor can learn, let him hear the words of Hesiod:
Best is the man who can himself advise,
He too his good who harkens to the wise,
But who, himself being witless ,will not heed
Another’s wisdom, is worthless indeed.
LS: So there are three kinds of men: those who know through their own power, and they
are the best. And the second are those who listen to or obey him who has spoken well;
this would be the perfect gentlemen, listening to Aristotle. And the third are the wholly
useless fellows who don’t know by themselves and who don’t listen to their betters.
Some of you will remember the three kinds of men in the Republic. Do you remember
them? Well, can I not make from time to time a little examination? These are the three
kinds of men in the Republic.
Student: The guardians, and the auxiliaries, and the working class.
Another Student: The moneymakers are . . .
LS: Yes, that is the same distinction. The third class does not really listen in the way in
which the auxiliaries, as they are called, listen. Now the class of those who listen to him
who speaks well, these are the gentlemen. They know the noble and just things through
hearing, through hearsay, and tradition. But this is not the highest form of knowledge.
The highest form of knowledge is to know it through oneself. Now let us read the very
beginning of the next chapter.
Reader:
But let us continue from this point where we digressed. (1095b8-14)
LS: Yes, now we learn here that this was a digression or an excursus. And as appears
from the sequel, this remark about method, as people call it today so misleadingly, about
the way in which Aristotle speaks and in which the hearer must hear: this is an excursus.
An excursus is not necessarily something unimportant or irrelevant, it can be very
important. Aristotle has three such remarks about how to speak and how to hear in the
first book. This is the central one, which we have just read. And as a rule, in authors like
Aristotle, what is at the center is particularly important. So this is a very important
excursus, but in a way, if a hasty reader says, “Well, I don’t wish to read it, because it’s
only an excursus,” no harm—I mean, he will not be punished by any legislator, of that he
can be sure. Yes. Now we leave it at this point. We have a few minutes left. Any
questions, objections?
Student: I have a great misgiving about Aristotle’s procedure in restricting the variety of
moral opinions by restricting himself to those who have experience in some control over
their passions. I don’t really think that this is enough to get rid of the variety of moral
opinions. I mean, if you restrict yourself to such people—
LS: All right, but still. Now let us take a simple case, an extreme case. If a man is in a
state of rage, and he has just heard that another fellow has done something bad, and he is
eager to kill that man. Is such a man so circumstanced in a position to listen to cool
reason? Must you not use first some form of violence, until he behaves himself?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

50

Same Student: I agree with that, but I think my question is a different question. It is:
even if you disregard such people, and I think there are good reasons for doing so, isn’t
there still a great deal of disagreement among people who have experience and who have
self-control?
LS: Yes, there is. But pick a single example, and then give . . .
Student: There are some societies where the parents are put to death when they reach a
certain age when they are no longer useful. This is done, this is thought to be good; this is
not thought to be wrong even by the most experienced people.
LS: Well, Aristotle does not go generally into questions of such detail, because it is a
detailed question. And you rightly imply [that] it does not necessarily contradict the
general notion, which Aristotle would assume all societies have, that one should honor
one’s parents, because of . . . saves the troubles. And then the men who would do it know
that the same will be done with them when they are. Therefore it is a moral principle, a
moral principle being one from whose validity you do not except yourself. Otherwise it’s
sheer crookedness, and only crooks do that. But if a man says, “If it is better to have the
parents put to sleep, then perhaps that goes for all the miseries of old age,” and says “of
course I want my children and their . . . it includes the same for me,” then it is at least
respectable at its face.
Yes. Go on, then the question would simply be simply be—Aristotle does not discuss
that. But I believe I can say it would be in the spirit to say: what then? Let us discuss it.
Whether the two alternatives, the alternatives [with] which we are familiar: that there will
be no killing of innocent people under any circumstances, except accidentally as in [an]
air war. You see, ifs and buts come in all the time. But generally speaking, we say no one
should be killed innocently, that parents are innocent people, we assume. Whether this is
not a sound principle, which was . . . we have to go into details and discuss it practically
and not merely in general assertions. “I believe that my conscience tells me what to do,”
that would be not worth any argument. We have to give reasons. And if one sees that, I
think one would have to enter into the subject and discuss it, because these people,
however primitive, who have such practices have reasons, sometimes disguised in the
form of stories or myths. Well, it is our duty as scientific men to take away the disguise
and state it in nonmythical [language] what the reason is, and then contrast it with the
reasoning underlying our practices. And that means, among other things, to make clear to
ourselves: why4 do we object to such practices, [e.g.], to the killing of the elders? . . . say
if I’m opposed to it, I’m speaking for myself and I’m therefore disqualified, I’m perfectly
willing to have every one of you . . . the premises for . . . In other words, there is
no . . . And all these questions are very complicated questions. But take an issue of
perhaps much greater gravity within the Western tradition: incest. And I am thinking not
of psychoanalysis, but I’m thinking of . . . and so this is a very difficult question,
illustrated by the biblical example that the human race could not possibly have multiplied
without incest, at least between brothers and sisters, because there is descent from a
single human. Very difficult. There are also some novels which present this issue in a
very powerful way, for example a novel by Goethe, Wilhelm Meister.xv This is not the
traditional—the problem of Aristotle: the traditional natural law teachers to the extent to
which they were not . . . therefore said that this prohibition against incest, at least
xv

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Wilhelm Meister’s Apprenticeship (1795-1796). Strauss
apparently refers to the incestuous union between Augustin and Sperata described in chapters 9
and 10 of book 8.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 3

51

between brothers and sisters, belongs to positive law, not to natural law. So these
questions are always known. But up from a certain point it becomes indeed a question of
crossing-point in all deeds. But up to a certain point it is a matter of reasonable—and we
must not evade it but try to think about it . . . What is in the mind of these people who
killed their aged parents? And what is in the mind of the people who say [that] under no
circumstances must this be done? [LS raps on the table.] There will be some reasons. And
sometimes it takes great trouble to disinter it, because the decisions were made very
early, and what remained for the future was only the result of the reason. This went that
way and the reasoning has to be disinterred. And this . . . function which anthropologists,
intelligent anthropologists, would have when they deal with these matters, and not merely
say, “There are such people who do such and other people who do other things.” That
will not do.
Well, we meet . . .
1

Deleted “with making.”
Deleted “the.”
3
Deleted “it.”
4
Deleted “would.
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

52

Session 4: February 21, 1968
Student: It seems that we have to know what the subject matter is first, in order to say
that we’re going to make such and such claims.
Leo Strauss: Well, do we not have to know what the subject matter is first under all
conditions? This can hardly be avoided. I mean, there may be a circle, but it is not visible
in this passage. It becomes visible later on, but in a passage we read last time,1 not in the
one which you have in mind. And it consists in this: that the goodness of decency is
presupposed. You have, as it were, to leap into the region of decency; and there is no
reasoning, no compelling reasoning which can bring even an indecent man to make that
leap. There are some reasonings which make it plausible, but the decisive thing is not
achieved by that. I advise you to read perhaps book 7 of the Politics. There is a certain
section, a very simple section, in which Aristotle speaks about the reasonableness or
possibility of assuming the goodness of virtue and of the various kinds of virtue in a
section where he discusses happiness. That’s a much more elementary and primitive
discussion, but this has also some advantages. You might read that. Now you have a
point? Or no? Yes. I still don’t remember your name, but I know who you are. [Laughter]
Student: I’d like to ask a question about something we discussed last time, and that was
your elaboration of the Ethics as a practical book, or theoretical book at one remove. It’s
a theoretical–practical book.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: And the question I have is, why can’t there be or why shouldn’t there be
a strictly theoretical science of politics? And by that I mean, well, say, Aristotle would
agree with the definition which you have given in various places, that the philosopher
seeks to know the whole. Now why couldn’t there be a science which seeks to know that
part of the whole which is political by answering the question, say,“What is the polis?” or
“What is political?” or defining the limits of the political in a strictly theoretical way and
that would be practical only in a secondary or even in an accidental sense, in that this
knowledge of the limits of the political would be practical only accidentally? In other
words, once you know what it is, then it could be applied, but that would not be its
primary goal.
LS: Yes. Now why does Aristotle not proceed in this way? I mean, was this wholly
beyond his ken, this possibility?
Student: It seems not to have been, because he was a student of Plato.
LS: And where do you find in Plato such a theoretical ethics, or the sketch of it, at least?
Same Student: Well, at least something like it in the Statesman, a purely theoretical view
of the political.
LS: Ya. That one could say. But more simply, in the Republic, when Plato discusses
there the virtues, he speaks first of the soul and its parts, or of the city and its parts; that is
fundamentally the same there. Therefore he is able to say there are only these four and no
other virtues, because the soul has these three parts, and then there must be a virtue
concerning the soul as a whole or the city as a whole: that would be justice.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

53

Now when Aristotle discusses the virtues, as you will see later on, already by the end of
this book he enumerates a number of virtues and never tries to deduce them as Plato
deduced them from the parts of the soul. So it is very easy to say: Aristotle, that’s quite
reasonable what you say there, but which guarantee did you have that your list of virtues
is complete? That, after all, is what we as theoretical men would want. No answer. Take
it or leave it. Or stated a bit more politely: show me a virtue which I omitted. Or show me
that I unreasonably introduced one human quality and called it a virtue. And then you
would be hard put to find any flaw in that. This I think is truly empirical: looking around
[and] seeing these kinds of virtues. Some are even nameless; that doesn’t do any harm.
But if the vice is named, then by implication there is a virtue there, even if it is not
named. But that’s easy. Yes?
Same Student: I may run the risk of asking a question you said we shouldn’t ask about—
LS: Oh, no. I did not mean it so literally.
Student: —there may be some things in that list of virtues which shouldn’t be, even
according to Aristotle, included. That is to say, don’t some of the moral virtues somehow
appear to be splendid vices, say, from the point of view of the theoretical virtues at least?
LS: Ya, but when does he speak about the theoretical virtues in this book?
Same Student: He starts speaking about them in the second book.
LS: Yes, but the full clarity about the relation of the moral and theoretical [is] at the end.
So in other words, the bulk of the book is written without articulating the highest human
possibility. Needless to say that Aristotle could not forget that for one moment, but he
thinks it is important that one should see the moral sphere as it presents itself if you are
blissfully unaware of true bliss: of theoretical, contemplative, speculative bliss. And why
did he do that? Why did he abstract throughout the bulk of the work2 [from] the highest?
Because it would naturally take away something of the grace and splendor of these
virtues.
Same Student: Well, why does the most graceful part come at the end?
LS: Because it is of so little importance to most human beings.
Same Student: But it would not seem right to come at the end, then.
LS: Well, in the first place, it is a general procedure that you ascend from the more
accessible to the less accessible. And that such a thing, say, like justice: that this is a
virtue and is very important, that is admitted by most people, and even by crooks,
because they have their way of justice among themselves, I was told. So one could only
say that they stop too early and draw the line at the wrong place, but they have some
inkling that there must be some proportion between risk and reward, for example, which
is the major principle of justice, so this can be easily granted. But the theoretical life: we
are of course spoiled in a way by a tradition of many centuries and take that for granted,
perhaps‚ although in modern times that was more and more questioned. But still it is
somewhere there in our background. But in earlier times, that was a very small part of the
city, a very small part, and if we disregard the common people, as Aristotle unfortunately
does most of the time, and limit ourselves only to the gentlemen, even the gentlemen
didn’t know anything of philosophy to speak of. Think of Pericles’s famous saying in the

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

54

funeral speech: philosophoumen met’ euteleias:i we philosophize with thrift, i.e., without
abandoning ourselves to it. You see, that is of course what Aristotle opposes. One should
abandon oneself to it—not all men, but not all men are fit for it anyway. This is an
extreme possibility. Now that something can be extreme and yet the highest is I suppose
known to students in Claremont from the famous scene in the Cow Palace some years
ago. [Laughter] So I do not have to labor this point. Now are you satisfied for the time
being?
Same Student: For the time being, yes.
LS: Good.
Another Student: You said that the intellectual virtues came last . . .
LS: Well, in a crude way, because he speaks really of the intellectual virtues in the widest
sense in book 6. But the highest virtue, the highest perfection of man, the highest
happiness, that becomes the theme only at the end of this work.
Another Student: One question is that it would seem that perhaps from one point of
view, or at least from the point of those very men that he directs the book at primarily,
and especially that in section about moral virtue, he leaves out something which is most
important to them, in a way that, say, philosophy isn’t, and this might be—
LS: What does he omit?
Student: Well, piety, for example.
LS: Yes, all right. That is a very good point. Here you have made a point of great
interest, because if we take an enumeration of the virtues as ordinarily understood by the
Greeks of that time, and we can see this from Plato and Xenophon and other writers,
piety would be one of these things and it is absent from Aristotle’s list. This is a serious
objection. Very good. But we have to go into the subject matter to see what Aristotle can
do. I can give you an answer, a provisional answer. What most people understood by
piety at the time was to pray and to sacrifice. Read Plato’s Euthyphro. Now for Aristotle,
surely sacrifices had no importance, I mean, except as a civic affair, you know, that rich
people put at the disposal of the community a couple of oxen or whatever it may be, and
a fine and gracious festival. ii But he did not believe for one moment that the gods were
pleased by that or that one could influence them. For Aristotle, piety, we can say, the
truth of piety, is knowledge of god; and this knowledge of god is what he calls theology
or metaphysics, or what is called by other people metaphysics. Therefore Aristotle has
the reasoning, but you have to disinter that; and partly that reasoning you would find in
that famous twelfth book of the Metaphysics, where he takes issue with the popular
notion of gods and presents his theology against that. That would be an important part of
the argument.
In addition, he has in the Ethics something which comes close to a discussion of piety,
namely, sense of shame, at the end of book 4. A sense of shame—aidōs: sacred
reverence, or however you wish to translate it—that is in a way the core of piety. And
Aristotle says with an amazing bluntness: it is not a virtue. He omits the aspect of
reverence; he leaves it only at sense of shame, not to say bashfulness. And he says: Well,
i
ii

Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 2.40.1.
See Rackham, 42-43, note a.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

55

that is a good quality in young people, because young people are bound to make
mistakes, and then of course they should be ashamed of them rather than the opposite.
But a mature gentleman does not make mistakes; he has nothing ever to repent. Here we
are at the opposite pole of biblical morality, obviously. I mean, that there is no man who
does not sin, Aristotle denies that. So. Is there any other question of a general kind? Yes?
Student: In the translations it seems that both the word science and the word art is used
to refer to politics, but I believe you suggested that we use . . . to refer to politics.
LS: Yes, well he says politikē, and that is an adjective and therefore in need of a noun. If
you wanted to quote literally, you would have to say “the political one.” But which, what
one? Is this an art, or is this a science? And I believe the least dangerous and the least
prejudging translation would be “ability.” And that is left open: Is this a science, is it an
art, or is it neither? I would then translate rather [hē politikē as] the political ability, if the
political one is too harsh as a translation, rather than make up Aristotle’s mind for him,
which I think a translator should not do. iii
Same Student: What is Aristotle’s distinction between art and science?
LS: Book 6. Well, very generally, an art produces something, for example, a shoe, a
statue, a drama, whereas a science does not produce anything: it only looks at, studies,
and follows. The mathematician does not produce triangles or circles . . . and the ones
which he produces on the blackboard are of course not the ones which he has in mind qua
mathematician. That is very roughly said. And there is a third thing which Aristotle
distinguishes from the two of them, which he calls phronēsis in Greek,iv and that is
ordinarily translated by “practical wisdom.” It would be simpler to translate it by
“prudence,” if “prudence” had not undergone such a depreciation that it means almost the
same as rascality. For Aristotle, prudence is something very high and inseparable from
moral virtue, as he makes clear also in book 6. Now and when he leaves it open whether
politics is an art, or a science, or maybe something third, what he is playing with is the
possibility that politics might be neither a science nor an art but a form of prudence. And
he develops that thought in book 6.
But we cannot always run ahead. We must proceed in a somewhat more orderly manner;
but on the other hand, it would of course be very bad if, as Mr. Wedergreen put it, I were
acting like Thrasymachus [and] I was forbidding you to raise certain questions. I’m not
forbidding any questions, but I only say it is intelligible that some men would forbid
some questions. Yes? For example, the question “Why be decent?” It is intelligible,
whether [or not] I am in favor that it should be raised. But it is of course a very dangerous
step, because in that moment I join the association of gangsters. “Why should one be a
square?,” as they put it in their elegant language. [Laughter] Good.
Now let us proceed. Well, I remind you briefly of the connection. Aristotle has found that
there is at least one name used by all men for the highest good, the name happiness. But
that is about all, because then the disagreement starts, and the chief cleavage is that
between the many and the graceful or refined ones; later he speaks even of the wise ones.
And the many say happiness consists in such things as pleasure, or wealth, or honor.
And3 there is [even] a greater variety. Sometimes the same individual says, “Now health
iii

Conventionally, hē politikē, a feminine substantivized adjective, is understood to be followed
by one of the following three, implicit nouns, which are mentioned above: (a) epistēmē: science
or knowledge; (b) technē: art; or (c) dynamis: ability, power, or capacity.
iv
Strauss spells “phronesis.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

56

is the greatest good,” and the next day he says wealth, because in the meantime he has
been restored to health, and he forgets about how much he is in need of it. Now this is
one thing. And then there is another view to which he alludes, namely, that some have
thought that beside all these many things which are regarded as good by most people,
there is one good, another one, by itself, which is even the cause of the goodness of all
the other things. So honor, wealth, pleasure, etc., are good only by virtue of that good in
itself. This is a reference to Plato, as we have seen. In the passage to which we turn now,
he will refute these views, both the vulgar views and the Platonic view. And now let’s
begin. 95b14.
Reader:
But let us continue from the point where we digressed. To judge from men’s lives, the not
unreasonable conceptionsv of the Good or Happiness that seem to prevail among them are
the following. On the one hand the many vi and the most vulgar identify itvii with pleasure,
and accordingly are content with the Life of Enjoyment—for there are three specially
prominent Lives, the one just mentioned, the Life of Politics—
LS: “And the life of politics, and the third—”
Reader:
and thirdly, the theoretical life.viii
LS: Yes.
Reader:
The many, then,ix show themselves to be utterly slavish, by preferring what is only a life
for cattle; but they get a hearing for their view as reasonable because many persons of
high position share the tastes of Sardanapallus. (1095b14-22)
LS: Let us stop here perhaps for a moment. So the variety of opinions regarding
happiness: it is limited now by a consideration not of the arts as it was before, but of the
ways of life, something very different from the arts. There are three most outstanding
ways of life, and the most common view gains credence because some men of very high
standing chose it, like Sardanapal, of whom he speaks here. In other words, there would
be no first-glance impression that pleasure would be the highest good, because of the
lowness of the people who say that, but for the fact that we find some men of high
standing—rulers, emperors, kings, leaders, and what have you—who by deed assert that
pleasure is the highest good. But of course that is almost a joke. The fact that there are
men of high standing in this sense who take the most vulgar view does not make the most
vulgar view more respectable in the eyes of men of judgment. If this view were correct,
that pleasure is the highest objective of life, then a dog who has a good master would be
happier than most men,4 which no sensible man would assert. Aristotle was not
sentimental regarding dogs. But of course no one dares to say that a merely brutish life
would be a happy life, no one in his senses at least. Now let us go on.
Reader:

v

In Rackham’s translation: “the more or less reasoned conceptions.”
In Rackham’s translation: “the generality of men.”
vii
In Rackham’s translation: “the Good.”
viii
In Rackham’s translation: “the Life of Contemplation.”
ix
In Rackham’s translation: “The generality of mankind then.”
vi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

57

The graceful on the other hand and the practical think it’s honourx—for this may be said
to be the end of the Life of Politics. But honour seems to be more superficial than that
which we are seeking; forxi it appears to depend on those who confer it more than on him
upon whom it is conferred, whereas we suppose that the good things xii must be something
proper to its possessor and not easy to be taken away from him.
LS: So in other words, the first notion of happiness which Aristotle thinks is worth
serious consideration is that according to which honor is happiness; honor as
distinguished from bodily pleasure. Clearly, brutes are not concerned with honor. I mean,
I say it with all respect to those of you who love dogs, maybe own dogs. They like to be
petted and to be much made of, but that is not the same as honor. Honor cannot be
happiness, since honor depends on the honoring man rather than the honored one. A man
may deserve honor to the highest degree, but if no one honors him he does not enjoy
honor. Is this not obvious? And now we guess somehow, we “divine,” as Aristotle says
with an expression liked very much by Plato, we divine, we have some inkling that
happiness is something which cannot be so easily taken away and depends on the happy
man himself rather than on others, because if happiness were dependent on others,
happiness would be the frailest thing in the world, much more frail than it is on any other
hypothesis. So let us go on.
Reader:
Yetxiii men’s motive in pursuing honour seems to be to assure themselves of their own—
LS: What he doesn’t bring out is this “furthermore.” That is a favorite word with
Aristotle: “furthermore,” “in addition,” “besides.” Sometimes he has n arguments without
making out a systematic order of them, he just enumerates them. He says, as it were:
Look here. Someone says a is b. Aristotle says: No. Look here, look here, look here, look
here, look here. And there might be—and if someone says, even there you would say:
Yes, why not? But Aristotle doesn’t think it necessary, or perhaps he has forgotten it and
thinks the other arguments which he adduces are sufficient. So in this sense, Aristotle is
“unsystematic” and perhaps the most unsystematic of all philosophers. Or as I would
prefer to say, he is “quote empirical.” He asks us to look around in all directions. Now the
second argument is there?
Reader:
At least they seek to be honored by the prudent. xiv (1095b22-28)
LS: No, before; you omitted that.
Reader: I’m sorry.
LS: “Furthermore they seem to pursue honor so that they will trust that they themselves
are good men.” Yes. Now go on.
Reader:
x

In Rackham’s translation: “Men of refinement, on the other hand, and men of action think that
the Good is honour.”
xi
In Rackham’s translation: “But honour after all seems too superficial to be the Good for which
we are seeking; for.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “we instinctively feel that the Good.”
xiii
In Rackham’s translation: “moreover.”
xiv
In Rackham’s translation: “men of judgement.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

58

at least they seek to be honoured by the prudent and by men who know them, and on the
ground of virtue. It is clear therefore that according to them—xv
LS: “According to them at any rate.”
Reader:
at any rate, virtue is greater;xvi and one might perhaps accordingly suppose that virtue
rather than honour is the end of the Political Life.”
LS: Yes. Now here Aristotle continues his argument against the assertion that the highest
good is honor, because this would of course be particularly attractive to gentlemen,
honor, and therefore it is necessary to make clear why one cannot leave it at that. The
concern with honor, Aristotle says, is in the service of one’s concern with one’s virtue. If
a man is truly ambitious, truly concerned with recognition, he wants to be recognized for
his genuine merits and not for qualities which he doesn’t have, for actions which he has
not done. Otherwise he would be a ridiculous boaster. So that therefore not honor but
virtue would be happiness; or more precisely, virtue would be the end of the political life
as distinguished from the third one which he had mentioned, namely, the theoretical life.
This inadequacy of honor, that it necessarily points away from itself to virtue, this is part
of the criticism of Thrasymachus and Callicles. Part of it. Yes?
Student: In this light, then, how would you interpret the last sentence in book 1, when he
talks about happiness being something which is in itself to be honored?
LS: Yes, but that is timion. Here honor has a different meaning and has almost the same
meaning as “divine.” But we cannot take this up now. I only mention this; it does not
conflict with this here. Honor is very dubious. It is of course highly desirable, but [only]
if it is true honor. And true honor means that one deserves it, and not that one has a kind
of clientele, like that of Mr. . . . or so. That is of course something which people regard as
honor: to be mentioned all the time in columns, you know, or in newspapers. But that is
not—because the moment the man is dead or has lost his ability to charm such large
masses of men, he will be completely forgotten, like a beachcomber, and of no interest.
Genuine honor presupposes that one deserves the honor, and therefore the ground of
honor is the deserts: virtue. Yes?
Reader:
But even virtue appears to be a more incomplete end;xvii since it appears possible to
possess it while you are asleep, or without putting it into practice throughout the whole of
your life; and also for the virtuous man to suffer the greatest misery and misfortune—
butxviii no one would pronounce a man living a life of misery to be happy, unless for the
sake of maintaining a paradox. (1095b28-1096a2)
LS: Yes. Here Aristotle goes on and says: Well, now we seem to have reached the end:
happiness is virtue. But unfortunately, difficulties arise even here, and virtue is
inadequate for two reasons. First, a man could have a given virtue without ever exercising
xv

In Rackham’s translation: “at least they seek to be honoured by men of judgement and by
people who know them, that is, they desire to be honoured on the ground of virtue. It is clear
therefore that in the opinion at all events of men of action.”
xvi
In Rackham’s translation: “virtue is a greater good than honour.”
xvii
In Rackham’s translation: “But even virtue proves on examination to be too incomplete to be
the End.”
xviii
In Rackham’s translation: “though.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

59

it. For example, if he is always asleep, then he cannot exercise virtue. Or, to take an
Aristotelian example, a man may have a true habit of munificence, but if he is poor, he
cannot be munificent; that’s absolutely not given to him. That’s one point. And secondly,
the man possessing virtue may live in the greatest misery, i.e., in the greatest
unhappiness. How can you call such a man happy?
Now these are not the last words of Aristotle on this subject . . . but this is only meant to
show in a provisional way that there is a deeper question here into which we must enter.
So we learn however one thing perhaps provisionally or by intimation: happiness has
something to do with the exercise of virtue and not with virtue as a mere habit, which as
such may be dormant. And the fact that happiness consists in the exercise of virtue
excludes that one lives in the greatest misery. If you exercise your virtues, you cannot
live in the greatest misery. If you are completely poor, if you are completely paralyzed
bodily, then you cannot exercise [it]. Or if you are insane, you cannot exercise [virtue].
Therefore a certain amount of external goods—“equipment” is a good translation for the
word Aristotle uses, chorēgia—is necessary for being virtuous. That’s a harsh judgment,
but I think you would understand it. In certain circles (as a matter of fact, in quite
numerous circles), this is the view throughout the centuries. That it is not the highest
view of human perfection, Aristotle does not deny. But the question is: what is that which
is higher than the virtue which you cannot have except if you are healthy and well and of
good parentage and so on? And it is theoretical virtue. In other words, where the Bible
puts love, Aristotle puts theōria. But the Bible and Aristotle agree that moral virtue as
such, however important it is, cannot raise the highest claim.
And coming back for one moment to an earlier question of Mr. Wedergreen [as to] why
Aristotle speaks throughout the book, or almost throughout the book, of moral virtue and
not of that highest virtue: well, I will use a simile. The moon, and things which appear
particularly beautiful in moonlight, would never reveal their beauty and their splendor in
the light of the sun. Therefore Aristotle keeps the sun in its state before rising or after
setting, so that this moon landscape of moral virtue gets all the attention and all the
respect which it deserves. Does this make sense? Good.
So Aristotle alludes here already [to the fact] that happiness consists in the exercise of
virtue and therefore presupposes equipment. But it is interesting that Aristotle does not
say it here. He prepares: first of all, he wants to shake us out of our complacency by
indicating to us that there are great difficulties, and then only after we have become
aware of the difficulties will we appreciate the answers. Yes?
Reader:
But we need not pursue this subject, since it has been sufficiently treated in the ordinary
discussions. The third type of life is the theoretical, which we shall make in the sequel
later on.xix
LS: No. “Which we shall consider in the sequel.” Yes. So only the theoretical life seems
to survive the first critical survey of the pleasure: bodily pleasure, honor, and virtue. But
again, this is not said by Aristotle but is only a prelude, as it were, for those among us
who have good ears to hear what will come later. Yes?
Reader:
But the materialistic life— (1096a2-6)
xix

In Rackham’s translation: “The third type of life is the Life of Contemplation, which we shall
consider in the sequel.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

60

LS: No, “the moneymaking.”
Reader:
life is something forced, and clearly wealth is not the Good we are in search for, xx for it is
only useful, a means to something else. On this score indeed one might conceive the ends
before mentioned to have a better claim, for they are enjoyed for their own sake. xxi
LS: “Loved for their own sake.”
Reader:
But even they do not really seem to be—
LS: “the desired good.”
Reader:
however, many arguments have been laid down in regard to that. So we may dismiss
them.xxii (1096a6-10)
LS: Yes. So that is the end of this provisional discussion of the common views. Now
what he says here is a kind of appendix about the moneymaking art, and he rejects it as
“violent.” Violent means here “against nature.” There is something unnatural in making
money one’s happiness. A man who makes pleasure his happiness, or honor, is more
reasonable than the man who makes money his happiness, because money, or wealth in
general, is only evidently a means for the good life and cannot be regarded as the end
under any circumstances; even in the most superficial consideration [it cannot] be
regarded as the end. But you can see it most simply, I believe, when you look at the
miser. When you take a man of ambition, even if [his ambition is] not of the highest kind,
there is a certain attractiveness about that. But the miser: there is something unnatural
about that, who heaps treasures upon treasures and never uses them. Yes?
Student: How are we to regard the sequence of this discussion? First he starts with
pleasure, then he ascends to honor, and then to the life of contemplation, but it seems to
me—
LS: Virtue [is] in between. Don’t forget that.
Same Student: Yes. Virtue, and then contemplation, and then he goes back to
moneymaking, which he doesn’t—
LS: Ya, that is a kind of appendix, I said. That is a kind of appendix. After all, he had
spoken before at the very beginning of the work of wealth as one of these goods, and
someone might say: Why did you not say a word about wealth as the highest good? And
then he says: Well, that is so patently absurd that I did not speak about it. Good.
So this is the first provisional discussion of the commonly-accepted notions of the good
or of happiness. And Aristotle turns next to a discussion of the alternative view, the
alternative view, namely, that the good is something radically different from all these
xx

In Rackham’s translation: “The Life of Money-making is a constrained kind of life, and clearly
wealth is not the Good we are in search of.”
xxi
In Rackham’s translation: “approved for their own sakes.”
xxii
In Rackham’s translation: “in regard to them, so we may dismiss them.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

61

goods and it is an absolute good, as we can provisionally say. And that is the doctrine of
Plato: Plato’s doctrine of the idea of the good. We know of it as the Platonic doctrine
from the few passages in books 6 and 7 of the Republic. Aristotle had of course
opportunities to talk to Plato, and Plato seems to have given some lectures on the good,
lectures which Plato did not write5 down. They have not been preserved. But surely
Aristotle had access to information which we necessarily lack.
But before do that, before we turn to Aristotle’s critique of Plato’s notion of the idea of
the good, we have to consider for one moment that Platonic doctrine of which the
doctrine of the idea of the good is the peak. Very simply stated, Plato teaches that there
are self-subsisting ideas, and they form a kind of order, and at the top of it, ruling all, is
the idea of the good. So if we do not have some understanding of what ideas in the
Platonic sense are, we will be unable to understand what the idea of the good is, and
therefore we will be unable to understand Aristotle’s criticism of it. Now I will try to
make things as simple for you as I can, and I take here a passage from Sir David Ross’s
Plato’s Theory of Ideas and the retrospect where he summarizes the argument, page 225
following. Now I have to read to you a page.
“The essence of the theory of Ideas lay in the conscious recognition of the fact that there
is a class of entities, for which the best name is probably ‘universals,’ that are entirely
different from sensible things. Any use of language involves the recognition, either
conscious or unconscious, of the fact that there are such entities; for every word used,
except proper names—every abstract noun, every general noun, every adjective, every
verb, even every pronoun and every preposition—is the name for something of which
there are or may be instances. The first step towards a conscious recognition of this class
of entities was, if we may believe Aristotle, taken by Socrates when he concentrated on
the search for definitions; to ask for the meaning of a general word was a step from the
mere use of such a word towards the recognition of universals as a distinct class of
entities. But Socrates seems to have been interested in the defining of one thing at a time,
and not to have seen the general significance of what he was doing; Plato did see that
what was common to all searches for definitions was the assumption that there are such
things as universals. He saw, too, that the objective difference between universals and
particulars answers to the subjective difference between science and sense-perception. [In
other words, science deals with universals and sense perception deals with particulars.—
LS]. The senses present to us a world of particular events in which qualities are present
almost inextricably conjoined and confused; if we were left to the senses alone we should
never be able to disentangle those qualities and reach a clear understanding of the
structure of the world. But in reason we have a faculty by which we can grasp universals
in their pure form and to some extent see the relations that necessarily exist between
them. The best example we have of this power is to be found in mathematics, and Plato
was the first thinker who clearly saw this. When we say that 2 and 2 make 4, we are
implying not that we have often experienced instances in which this is so, and never
found an instance to the contrary, but that we perceive that from the nature of the system
of numbers this must be so; and what is true of ‘2 and 2 make 4’ is true of the most
advanced mathematical propositions. In mathematics Plato saw the clearest example of
the mind’s power of perceiving relations between universals; and that is why in the
Republic he makes mathematics the necessary introduction to philosophy. But it was, for
him, only the introduction. He envisaged the possibility of our similarly perceiving
necessary relations between other universals than those treated of by mathematics; and in
the Phaedo he gives us one, and in the Sophistes another, modest instalment of such
insight. In the main this is still an unfulfilled aspiration; but we owe it to Plato that we
have the aspiration at all. He expressed sometimes the aspiration too sanguinely, as when
in the Republic he speaks of deducing the whole nature of the system of Ideas from a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

62

single unhypothetical first principle. [He means by that the idea of the good.—LS] In that
he was mistaken.”xxiii
And so on. Do you understand that? What is a universal? One of you give me an
example. Or a particular, then. Yes?
Student: The idea of a chair.
LS: Chair. Okay. Let us say a chair [laughter] or table, because that’s in front of you. A
table is this particular thing. And then Plato says, when we are asked: What is that? [A]
table! But we say this in n cases and of many other things of this kind. That shows that
“table” means not merely this table here, but any table. It applies to all tables. It is a
universal. And these universals were in a way discovered by Socrates as such. Socrates
made clear what men always did in all times and places, because there is always
language, and language consists to a considerable part of nonproper names. Because
when we say, for example, Tom Engeman, I don’t see him here—oh, he is sitting
somewhere—Tom Engeman, then this is this individual. Even if there are thirty five men
of the same name in some big city, it would still not be a universal but a proper name. Or
LBJ,xxiv this individual. Good.
Now what does this mean? This is surely a great question, these universals. There was a
famous controversy of the Middle Ages, the so-called controversy about universals. But
what does this mean? After all, we are not logicians here, we are political scientists, and
it must mean something for us when Plato presents this doctrine in a political work like
the Republic. I will first try to show why Sir David’s view is, I think, ultimately
impossible, namely, for the following reason. If he were correct that Plato meant by
“ideas” universals, then there would be ideas of everything of which we have a term, a
word that is not a proper name. And the ideas are, according to Plato, eternal. So there
would therefore be an eternal idea of the vice-president of the farm laborers. Naturally,
that’s not a proper name; that is applied to n people who are vice-presidents of farm labor
unions. And Plato said not only that there are such universals but also they are selfsubsisting: there is a self-subsisting idea of the vice-president of the farm laborers union.
Why should there be? What’s the need of it? Is this not an absolutely ridiculous
duplication of what is? In a way, that is what Aristotle means, but we have to go a bit
further in order to understand that.
Now what did Plato have in mind when, according to the tradition deviating from
Socrates, he said the ideas are self-subsisting and cannot possibly be sensible things?
Now there are two kinds of phenomena of which he certainly thought, and the first is
mathematics, as Sir David says. For example, a circle of which the mathematician speaks,
or a triangle, is never the circle drawn on the blackboard, because what you draw on the
blackboard is not a triangle. It is a very absurd, complicated curve, and only for the sake
of our purposes [do] we regard this as a triangle. These are not lines . . . So the
mathematical things as meant in mathematical discourse are radically different from all
sensible things. We must use the mind’s eye, as distinct from the bodily eye, in order to
see triangle, circle, the number seven, or whatever it may be. But here there is a certain
difficulty. In mathematics, if, for example, you take a certain kind of triangle, you can
have a large number of triangles with the same angles and the same sides. There’s no
difficulty in that. And this is somehow what in Plato’s eyes speaks against the ultimate
importance of mathematics: the mathematical objects can be indefinitely multiplied. I
xxiii
xxiv

W. D. Ross, Plato’s Theory of Ideas (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1951), 225-26.
That is, Lyndon Baines Johnson, American president.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

63

mean, not that you can go on with numbers; that’s all right. You don’t multiply by saying
“4,912, 4,913” because obviously the [second] is a different number, but you can add up
4,912 and another 4,912. So there are two of these ideal things, and that is something
which led Plato to go beyond that.
Now where did Plato find some evidence for the view that there are self-subsisting
things? A very old and respectable answer, which is good enough as far as it goes, says:
in the moral phenomena. Say, justice: we know of just men. We know of just laws. We
know of just institutions. But a little reflection will suffice in all cases [to see] that no
human being, no law, no institution, is perfectly just. If the term “justice” or “just” is not
to be wholly meaningless, there must be justice beyond every just phenomenon which we
can see, and in the light of which idea we can diagnose any human beings, any law, any
institution, and see to what extent is it just, and to what extent it is not just. Good. Now
this phenomenon seems to have been of the utmost importance for Socrates and Plato.
But this does not yet suffice. In the first place, because it does not answer the question:
what is the relation between the mathematical objects and the moral objects, if I may call
justice a moral object? After all, there are other things in the world apart from
mathematical things and moral things. There are, for example, dogs and cats in the world.
Now what is then at the root of this doctrine of ideas, the simple root, and not these
twofold mathematical things and ethical things, where we do not see the unity? Now the
word most commonly used by Plato for ideas (idea in Greek) can be translated, is more
frequently translated, correctly, as “forms”: the looks, the shapes, but also the kinds of
things. And this is indeed the concern of Socrates, and perhaps in a modified manner (we
do not know enough to decide that question) of Plato. Let me try to explain that. I begin
from difficulties which we all experience today. Today when we hear, in social science
especially, of scientific procedure, of scientific statements and so on, it is always
understood that the man in the street—say, the voter, for example—does not make his
decision on the basis of scientific reasoning. There is such a thing as prescientific
thought. And this distinction is absolutely indispensable and universally admitted.
Prescientific thought. For example, if I know in my poor way that there are presidential
elections every fourth year, that’s not scientific knowledge. I just found this by reading
the newspapers and perhaps even the text of the U.S. Constitution, but there is nothing
scientific about this knowledge. And no social scientist, however sophisticated he may
be, does not know this fact, that there are presidential elections every fourth year, in any
way better than the simplest man in the street . . .
The question is this. The controversy is this: is it not the ideal goal of science—or, more
particularly, social science—to get rid of all prescientific knowledge? In other words,
people admit of course that we are bound by, we have to start always from prescientific
knowledge, but some people have the notion [that] what social science does is to
transform this prescientific knowledge into scientific knowledge, and only by virtue of
this transformation will we arrive at genuine knowledge. Prescientific knowledge means
something like “folklore,” an expression used by some representatives of this view. Now
I would like to make clear to you by a simple example that this is an absolutely fantastic
goal. Let us assume that you are sociologists (I wish to go out of our sacred precincts),
and your professor tells you to make some field study and find out, say, about alcoholism
or other things with which sociologists are concerned. He should [tell you to] ask people
about their opinion, and he will give you the most precise suggestions. But one thing he
will not tell you: how to tell a human being from a nonhuman being. He takes it for
granted that you know that, and if you [did] not know that, you would be wholly unfit to
be a student of sociology, or of political science, or of any other science. Now how do
you know how to tell a human being from a nonhuman being? Where did you learn it? In
high school? No. In grammar school? No, but you just grew up with it. You can’t know,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

64

say, the precise day where you used for the first time the word human being with some
understanding that you cannot call this a human being or a dog a human being . . . a
human being. And if you tried to find out what do you mean by a human being, you will
get into great troubles. And no less a man than Plato proposed, on one occasion at least,
that what we mean by human being is, if spelled out, nothing but nonfeathered biped.xxv
[Laughter] Feathered bipeds we all know, but man is a biped without feathers. And this is
not quite sufficient, as we all can see. Now here we have a simple example that there is
always prescientific knowledge presupposed by social science. And this prescientific
knowledge is never transformed into scientific knowledge in social science itself.
Now this presupposition of all possible science, and this kind of presupposition, is the
theme of Socrates and Plato and Aristotle. Now to make this a bit more clear, let us
consider not just modern social science but the classical Greek alternative to Socratic–
Platonic–Aristotelian philosophy. And the greatest, best known alternative to that is
atomism, ancient atomism. Now what is the situation here? According to atomism, all
things consist of atoms of various sizes and shapes. So to understand a cat, a dog, a lion, a
man is to know of which atoms or kind of atoms he’s composed. And, as it were, if you
know a compound consisting of so-and-so many atoms of this kind [and] of this shape,
[and another compound consisting of] so-and-so many atoms of the other shape and so
on, then you would know that the formula—I’m speaking already in a modern manner—
that the formula for the dog and the other one is the formula for the cat, and so on. I
believe you have no difficulty in following this point.
Now what is the Socratic–Platonic objection to this kind of procedure? Must I not know
in advance what a cat, a lion, a man is, before I can trace them to their atomic
compositions? Must I not know it in advance? Otherwise I might investigate the atomic
composition of a being which is neither a man, nor a cat, nor a lion. What kind of
knowledge is that? This is a knowledge which we all have and which we have by virtue
of having grown up: an obvious and at the same time mysterious faculty. So Socrates and
his followers ask for the “What is?” of each kind of things. They didn’t ask the “What
is?” of Alcibiades or of LBJ, or whatever you might take, but the “What is?” of man, of
cat, of table, of chair, what have you.
And if we can state the simple argument against atomism or anything of this kind, [it]
would be to this effect: atomism would reduce the essential differences to differences of
size or shape of atoms. But the essential differences, they are the point. Let me take an
example from political science. There are people who try to present the issue between
liberal democracy and its alternatives in the following manner. They say in both instances
you find freedom. After all, I think a Russian citizen, even a Chinese citizen, has the
freedom to walk in certain parts of the cities, the freedom to spit, and some other
freedoms, without any question. But on the other hand, there is obvious coercion, even in
liberal democracies. People are arrested here as well as in Soviet Russia. So the ideal task
would be to describe the liberal democracy on the one hand and, say, communism on the
other by saying what the percentage or range of percentages is of freedom and coercion
which makes a certain system liberal democratic and another communist. As a
consequence, assuming that this could be done, it would reduce the essential difference to
a quantitative difference: we have so and so many percent of freedom in this system, and
so and so many percent of coercion in the one system, and so and so many percent of
freedom and coercion in the other. You would lose the essential differences. You see
perhaps from this example that this is not merely an academic question but has to do with

xxv

Diogenes Laertius, Lives of Eminent Philosophers, 6.40.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

65

a crucial question with which all human beings are concerned: the essential differences,
or as one could also say, the principles of importance.
Now the implication of this view, then, that there are essential differences and that the
essential differences are that things which counts above everything else, this implies that
the whole consists of kinds of beings, not of kinds of atoms. There may be atoms (this is a
long question), but there are kinds of things: man, dog, cat, what have you. To understand
the whole is, or is above all to understand the kinds of things in their order: for example,
to know that a plant is lower than an animal, and that a dumb animal is lower than man,
to mention only the most obvious examples. Philosophy is here not so much cosmogony,
an explanation of how the whole cosmos came into being, say, out of atoms and the void,
but cosmology: to present the logos of the cosmos, of the finished, completed cosmos.
You can easily see how very important for this whole approach was the emergence of
evolutionism in the nineteenth century, because if one would translate Darwin’s title the
Origin of Species into Greek, I think the most reasonable translation, although not the
most literal one, would be genesis tōn eidōn, “The Coming-to-Being of These Forms, of
the Ideas,” and then you see [the implications for cosmology], whereas according to Plato
the ideas cannot come into being and cannot perish. But the question nevertheless, in
spite of the tremendous importance which the evolutionary hypothesis has for all human
thought, at least in the case of man—what is the essential difference between man and the
other beings?—is as urgent as it always has been. This question cannot be disposed of by
any discoveries of ever more intermediate forms between some nonman and man,
because at a certain moment, the quantitative difference between the size of the brain or
whatever it is turns into a qualitative difference, and you have now a being which can
speak, coherently talk. Now when people talk today about the human condition, [a term]
which has taken the place of “human nature” or the “essence of man” or the “nature of
man,” then of course this presupposes the nature of man nevertheless, because the human
condition is exactly the condition of a being which has the nature of man.
Now as for the difference between Plato and Aristotle, Plato says that these ideas of dog,
cat, justice, and so on and so on, are self-subsisting, or, as he says in poetic language,
they are self-subsisting in a super-heavenly place. The gods are in heaven, but beyond
heaven there are still more remote and more grand places, and there the ideas dwell. And
things here, the sensible things, the dogs, cats, lions, and human beings we always see,
are only by virtue of these ideas dwelling in the super-heavenly place. Now to repeat
what I said before: the evidence which Plato has you can make most clear to yourself by
thinking of the example of justice. Plato asserts, and that is implied in the doctrine of
ideas, [that] no human being, no law, and no institution can be unqualifiedly just, as a
consequence, because it is a particular thing. Aristotle is not so demanding. Aristotle is
perfectly satisfied that there are many people who are just; perhaps not too many, but
quite a few. And laws can be just, institutions can be just.
I will state the difference between Plato and Aristotle as follows, and from an Aristotelian
point of view. Plato is compelled to say the true dog—the dog in itself, the dog dwelling
in that super-heavenly place—doesn’t run around, doesn’t eat food (dog food or other),
does not generate dogs, but is wholly unchangeable. And Aristotle says that’s nonsense:
the true dog is of course a dog which runs around, and barks, and does all the other things
which dogs do. Aristotle, here as in many other cases, [defends] common sense itself
against his less commonsensical, great teacher. But would Plato be reduced to silence by
this powerful argument? No, for the following reason. A true dog: what does it mean,
from Aristotle’s point of view, which is, I think, also our ordinary point of view? When a
farmer, let me say, or a sheriff says, “Bring me a dog,” and the fellow brings him a
puppy, then he would say, “Did I tell you to bring a puppy? No, [I told you to] bring a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 4

66

dog.” Or if he brings a very sick old dog about to expire, [he would say], “Is this a dog?
That’s a sick dog, an old dog.” Good. So the dog without qualifications, like too young to
be a dog, or too old to be a dog, is the true dog. That would be a dog in its maturity, and a
healthy normal dog, normal not in the sense of the statistical average, but where the word
norm still means norm. “Normal” is still derived from “norm.” The true dog, and that is a
being which can by itself live as a dog and do the doggish things. Good. But here Plato
comes in and says: well, one of the doggish things of the utmost importance is the
generation of new dogs. Now if you look at this here dog, it will always be invariably
either a male or female dog, neither of which is competent to generate by itself another
dog. And therefore, if you want to see the true dog, the perfect dog, you will not find it in
any individual. [LS raps on the table.]
Now apply this to the human race. Let us assume that men like Socrates are the most
perfect human beings: a wonderful character, and in addition he generated children. He
didn’t write books, but still it is perhaps more important that he generated children. And
he bore his Xanthippe with all dignity and propriety, and you know the other qualities of
Socrates. Good. But is he a perfect human being? Would Socrates be possible if there
were not people who were paving roads, building temples, and making shoes? Socrates
didn’t make his shoes, and on the few occasions when he needed them, he had to have
bought them. So no human being is self-sufficient. In other words—a great jump now—
the whole human race, the whole humankind, the whole human species is the perfect
man. And here there is a kind of—one can understand here why the eidos, the term for
idea or for form, means at the same time, of course literally translated, the species. That is
Plato’s point against Aristotle. Now this complete thing, sufficient for all purposes of the
species, you will not find in any individual, and you have to go beyond it, either to the
idea of dog, to dogness or to the whole species. But you cannot go to the whole species if
you do not know what makes a being a member of the species, and that means something
beyond every individual and comprising all of them.
So this much about the background of this great struggle between Plato and Aristotle,
which shows on various levels in Aristotle’s criticism of Plato, not only in the theoretical
works but also in the political works: the critique of Plato’s Republic and Laws in the
second book of the Politics, and here the critique of Plato’s doctrine of the idea of the
good in our Nicomachean Ethics. And we will turn to that next time. Yes.
1

Deleted “but.”
Deleted “of”
3
Moved “even.”
4
Deleted “and.”
5
Deleted “them.”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 5

67

Session 5: February 22, 1968i
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —however, that is the intention that we make with . . . but he
surely takes it for granted. Yes?
Reader:
On the other hand a limit has to be assumed in these relationships; for if the list be
extended to one’s ancestors and descendants and to the friends of one’s friends, it will go
on ad infinitum. But this is a point that must be considered later on; we take a selfsufficient thing to mean a thing which merely standing by itself alone renders life
desirable and lacking in nothing, and such a thing we deem happiness to be. Moreover,
we think happiness the most desirable of all good things without being itself reckoned as
one among the rest; for if it were so reckoned, it is clear that we should consider it more
desirable when even the smallest of other good things were combined with it, since this
addition would result in a larger total of good, and of two goods the greater is always the
more desirable.
LS: Yes. Now let us stop here. You see here this brief discussion: how far do you extend
that? I mean, it is clear that if you are happy for yourself but your nearest and dearest are
very miserable, your happiness will not be complete. But how far do you extend your
nearest and dearest? Must cousins also come in like brothers and sisters? And if cousins,
also cousins of the second degree? And where do you stop? No universal answer is
possible. That is a simple illustration of the inexactness, of the lack of exactness, in moral
matters. In some cases, for example, in a very closely-knit family the cousins even count
as much as brothers and sisters; and in other cases, perhaps not even all brothers and
sisters are important for assessing one’s own happiness.
The question which Aristotle raises here by implication is this: will happiness be
increased by intelligence and virtue, or does happiness necessarily include intelligence
and1 [virtue]? Aristotle’s general answer, as we will see soon, is the latter. So there
cannot be happiness here and the virtues there, but the virtues are as it were the core of
happiness. Now this question he tries to answer, and the answer to it is his final answer to
the question of what happiness is, and that comes in the next passage, of which we might
perhaps read the beginning.
Reader:
Happiness, therefore, being found to be something final and self-sufficient, is the End at
which all actions aim.
LS: Ya, “is the end of the practicable goods” would be perhaps more precise. Yes?
Reader:
To say however that the Supreme Good is happiness will probably appear a truism; we
still require a more explicit account of what constitutes happiness. Perhaps then we may
arrive at this by ascertaining what is man’s function. (1097b11-25)
LS: Let us say “work,” because the word “function” is now so grossly misused. And let
us leave the simple word which Aristotle uses in Greek: the work of man. What is the
work of man? Yes?
i

The original transcriber notes: “Please note that lecture 5 was not completely recorded. As a
result, we are only able to reproduce here approximately 15 minutes of the total lecture.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 5

68

Reader:
For the goodness or efficiency of a flute-player or sculptor or craftsman of any sort, and
in general of anybody who has some workii or business to perform, is thought to reside in
that function—
LS: That work.
Reader:
that work; and similarly it may be held that the good of man resides in the work of man. iii
(1097b25-28)
LS: Yes. So Aristotle tries now to reach a solution to the question of what happiness is.
Now happiness is a good state of man, and not only a good state but the best state of man.
And Aristotle raises here the question: where is goodness located altogether? And he
takes first the example of the arts or artisans. For example, say, a carpenter: how do we
distinguish a good carpenter from a bad or indifferent carpenter? By looking at the tables
which the two carpenters produce: at the work. Now let us try this with man. Is there not
also a specific work of man as man by which we can distinguish between the good man
and the bad man? Now we must here note that they translate it by “function.” But the
Greek word “work” (and I believe also the English word “work”) leaves it open whether
the work is something outside, self-subsisting after it has been completed, like the table
or the shoe, or whether the work is an action. Can one not say it?
Therefore Aristotle [asks]: is there a work of man as man, a specific work of man? If that
is so, then human goodness, and in particular the highest form of goodness, happiness,
will consist in a specific work. And if you do not like the word “work,” say “activity.”
But the Greek word ergon comprises both the work in the sense of the . . . like shoe, and
the work in the sense of the productive activity, the shoemaking. Aristotle tries now to
find in the sequel the answer to this question. The general answer is this: that man’s
specific work, his specific activity, is rationality; and therefore the goodness of man will
consist in the goodness of his rationality, i.e., if he uses his reason for destroying his
reason (say, by becoming an alcoholic), then he is a bad man, but if he cultivates his
reasoning and makes the most of it and the best of it, then he is a good man. And there
are certain minor, important distinctions, secondary distinctions into which I do not have
to go now.
So the answer which Aristotle arrives at, in a few more steps which we will consider next
time, is this: happiness consists in virtuous or excellent activity, but specifically human
activity. A man may be an excellent tightrope dancer, but this does not make him an
excellent man, because tightrope dancing is not the activity characteristic of man. Maybe
only men can tightrope dance (I have no opinion on this matter), but it is surely not the
activity characteristic of man. To be an excellent man means to be able to do the work of
man in reasoning in an excellent manner. And if this is so, we already include [the
requirement] that the excellent man must have some means, means outside of his good
intentions. For example, if he were completely paralyzed [and] could not even speak,
then he could not do the works of man. He would be an unfortunate man, a proper object
of compassion, but he could not be an excellent man. How can we know how he would
act if he were not paralyzed? And also, if it is true that there are certain activities of man
which require a modicum of wealth, as was the case prior to our age of affluence, then
ii
iii

In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
In Rackham’s translation: “the function of man.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 5

69

there will be quite a few human beings who will be unable to do the work of man, lacking
the means of support. Very unfortunate, but Aristotle implies that it cannot be changed.
The main point is this. By speaking of virtuous activity, Aristotle includes the external
conditions of happiness in his definition of happiness, and therefore he disposes of a
difficulty with which confronted us shortly before. At the end of this section, which we
just began, there is again a discussion of what I call method, meaning: what is the degree
of exactness to be expected in such matters, moral matters? There are altogether three
discussions. That will be the third. We will come to that next time. Now we make here a
stop. Is there any question? We will retrace. Mr . . . ?
Student: When Aristotle says that the truth is to be preferred to one’s friends, does this
apply only to those who discuss ethics, or does it also apply to gentlemen simply?
LS: As Aristotle means it here, it does not apply to nonphilosophers. If it were
understood in a different sense—for example, must a friend be a witness before a court
against his friend and say the truth rather than save his friend?—then I suppose he would
say in this case [that] unless it is a terribly tyrannical regime, he would have to say the
truth, because he is under oath, after all. But as he means it here, the question arises only
for philosophers, because the truth is theoretical or speculative truth.
Same Student: And in that sense again we see the difference between the man who
addresses the audience and the nature of the audience itself, because certainly the
audience itself would be more inclined to prefer their friends to the truth, as a general
rule.
LS: Yes, you could almost say that is a definition of the nonphilosopher. Now any other
points?
Another Student: Could I ask you a question about what you said last time?
LS: Yes. I mean, that would be a very undemocratic procedure, that in today’s meeting
only today’s subjects would be discussed. Yes?
Same Student: I didn’t quite understand what you said about Plato’s view of
mathematical objects. You said that they were ultimately not ideas for him.
LS: They’re not ideas—the idea of the dog, or of justice, for that matter. There is one and
only one idea of the dog, and only one idea of justice, and only one idea of man. But if
you take five, the number five, there are many fives. I can easily prove it to you. Five
plus five: the first five is not the second five. [Laughter] You can invert the order, but still
there remain two fives. You cannot make additions of ideas, but you can make and must
make additions of numbers; and for that matter also of magnitudes, of course. You can
add one triangle to another, one circle to another, and so.
Same Student: But couldn’t you say that each of those fives or each of those triangles
are individuals fives [or triangles].
LS: Yes, then you would have to say that there is an idea of the triangle or [an] idea of
five that is higher than the fives which occur in operation. There exists in Plato a teaching
of ideal numbers. And some people understood ideal numbers to be this idea of five in
contradistinction to the fives or straight lines, circles, and so on, but I do not think that
they are right. Aristotle’s testimony is quite clear that Plato did not admit any ideas of
numbers. The ideas are intellectual or noetic, but sensible—did I say ideas? No, I want to

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 5

70

say numbers or other mathematical things are not sensible, but noetic, intellectual,
because you can never see a straight line, you can never draw a straight line. It’s always
smudged somehow. The line of which the geometer talks is not the line which he sees as
the table or which he draws as the table.
And the same is true of ideas. All justice we find in the world—in men, or in actions, or
in institutions—is imperfect, as imperfect as the straight line drawn on the blackboard.
And therefore they point to something which can no longer be seen with the bodily eye,
but [can be seen] only with the eyes of the mind, and these are the noetic things. And the
noetic things consist of these two branches: the mathematical things and the ideas. And I
think the simplest sign of the difference between the ideas and the mathematical things is
the multiplicity of the noetic things in mathematics. You see in the case of dogs a great
multiplicity of dogs, one idea of dog. But the multiplicity is the multiplicity of the dogs
we see, of sensible dogs—sensible not in the sense of housebroken [laughter] but in the
sense of being visible to the eyes. Ya? Good.
1

Deleted “happiness.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

71

Session 6: February 28, 1968
Leo Strauss: So may we come to order now. Aristotle starts from the premise that the
highest and complete good—both highest and complete—is happiness, as appears from
what he says about the subject. There was universal agreement as to the soundness of the
starting point, only there were great disagreements as to the meaning of happiness. But
that happiness should be the starting point, that was universally admitted. Now this
starting point, this notion, is still intelligible. I mention only one example. The
Declaration of Independence: the right to the pursuit of happiness. But nevertheless the
word happiness as we use it now does not have the fullness which the Greek word
eudaimōn has. And the Greek word we can say safely stands in meaning between
happiness and blessed. And we—sometimes it is wiser to think of bliss than of happiness
when reading the remarks of Aristotle. Aristotle starts then from the fact that all men, and
therefore in particular also the good men, strive for happiness. His concern with
happiness is in a way prior to his concern with virtue. Virtue proves to be the core of
happiness. But the first step is happiness.
Now in modern times, this starting point has become questionable. I mentioned last time
Hobbes.i I remind you of the main point: Hobbes denies that there is a highest good. The
felicity of this life, what Aristotle understands by happiness, consists not in the repose of
a mind satisfied. Felicity, as the old moral philosophers understood it, is the condition in
which man’s desires are at an end, because man has reached the highest and supreme
good. And Hobbes says such a condition is impossible. Therefore the felicity of which we
can dream is a continual progress of1 desire, and the final conclusion is that human life is
characterized by a perpetual and restless desire of power after power that ceases only in
death.
Now of course the question is whether Aristotle understood by happiness the condition in
which man’s desires are at an end. Does a happy man not need food, drink, sleep, etc.,
and therefore have desires for food, drink, and sleep? So Aristotle surely does not mean
that a happy man’s desires are at an end in the way in which Hobbes understood it. But
one could perhaps say the happy man needs these things as replenishments. It is not
meant as a progress if he eats again the next day. He doesn’t want to have ever more
food, ever more drink, or ever better food and better drink, and so on. And furthermore, is
felicity in the Aristotelian sense—does it consist in the repose of a mind satisfied? Well, a
mind satisfied, yes. But repose is somewhat misleading because happiness as Aristotle
understands it consists in activity, and we will see that soon.
Much more important was the criticism of the notion of happiness by Kant. According to
Kant, happiness is the sum of satisfaction of all our inclinations, and therefore happiness
is an undetermined concept, these inclinations differing from individual to individual and
within the individual from time to time. It is, in other words, an ideal of the imagination,
not of reason, and therefore it cannot be the principle of morality. The principle of
morality according to Kant is duty or respect for the moral law, not happiness. The
principle of morality as Kant understands it cannot be taken from the nature of man,
whereas happiness is a human goal. Because the principle of morality must apply even to
beings higher than man, especially to God, because if we have different moral standards,
as it were, for God as we have for man, then moral chaos would follow. And secondly, if
the moral standard is taken from man’s nature, man’s goodness, man’s moral possibilities
might be limited by his nature. This is a thought with which I’m sure you all are familiar
i

The transcript of session 5 is incomplete and does not include the discussion of Hobbes.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

72

in applications. For example, if equal rights are denied to the fairer sex on the ground that
the natural differences are so important that men should have a higher status than women,
then the question arises: what do we know about the possibilities of the female sex, since
the sex has never been given a fair chance to rise to its highest possibilities? The
consequence in Kant is that what is morally demanded does not require a proof of
possibility. We do not have to go into the question [of] what the differences between men
and women for example morally are; for Kant that follows from his moral principle
which implies that what we are obliged to do, morally obliged to do, we can do. “Thou
canst, because thou oughtst,” and therefore there is no need of a proof of the possibility of
what is morally demanded. So at any rate, happiness loses its central status in moral
philosophy through Kant.
But nevertheless, the tradition which put [happiness]ii at the basis of moral philosophy
continued. I refer to the right to the pursuit of happiness in the Declaration of
Independence. I may mention here in passing that this notion of the right to the pursuit of
happiness is not, as one student of the Declaration of Independence said, a product of the
frontier, of the frontier mentality. [Gilbert] Chinard, a Frenchman, mentioned the fact that
in the French Declaration of the Rights of Man, the right to the pursuit of happiness is not
mentioned, because the French are much too sophisticated or cynical to believe in such a
thing, but the young American nation in the frontier, they still believed in happiness.iii
That’s sheer nonsense, of course. The right to the pursuit of happiness was, to the best of
my knowledge, stated for the first time by a German philosopher of the eighteenth
century, Christian Wolff, in his Natural Right.iv And what he understood by the right of
happiness is indicated by these two examples. Man has no natural rights to vindicate the
glory of God. So in other words, if a man commits a blasphemy, man does not have a
natural right to kill or silence, or whatever, the blasphemer. But on the other hand, man
has a natural right to cosmetics: to adorn his body. In brief, the notion of the right of
happiness emerges originally rather in a continental rococo context [laughter] than in the
context of the American frontier.
After Wolff, the notion of happiness played a central role in utilitarianism: the happiness
of the greatest number. And this leads me to a relatively late stage in the tradition of
happiness, and that is Nietzsche. Nietzsche said occasionally or had someone say
occasionally: I do not strive for happiness, but for my work. And in the movement which 2
[is] now at present quite powerful, called existentialism, this critique of happiness is
taken for granted, perhaps not even mentioned anymore. It is understood that happiness is
not the ultimate end of man. I would like to illustrate Nietzsche’s critique of happiness by
a remark occurring near the beginning of his Zarathustra. Now Zarathustra had addressed
the multitude and spoken to them of the overman or superman. And there was no
reaction, no understanding. They laughed about it. And then he said, “Let me then
address their pride. Let me speak to them of what is most contemptible.” But that is the
last man:
“The time has come for man to set himself a goal. The time has come for man to plant the
seed of his highest hope. His soil is still rich enough. But one day this soil will be poor
and domesticated, and no tall tree will be able to grow in it. Alas, the time is coming
ii

Strauss evidently misspoke in saying “morality” here, since the topic he now turns to is the role
of happiness in modern moral philosophy.
iii
Gilbert Chinard (1881-1972), French-American historian.
iv
Christian Wolff, Institutiones juris naturae et gentium (1750), in Gesammelte Werke, edited by
Jean Ecole, Hans Werner Arndt, Marcel Thomann and Joseph Ehrenfried Hofmann (Hildesheim:
Georg Olms Verlag, 1969), section 2, vol. 26.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

73

when man will no longer shoot the arrow of his longing beyond man, and the string of his
bow will have forgotten how to whir!
“I say unto you: one must still have chaos in oneself to be able to give birth to a dancing
star. I say unto you: you still have chaos in yourselves.
“Alas, the time is coming when man will no longer give birth to a star. Alas, the time of
the most despicable man is coming, he that is no longer able to despise himself. Behold, I
show you the last man.
“‘What is love? What is creation? What is longing? What is a star?’ thus asks the last
man, and he blinks.
“The earth has become small, and on it hops the last man, who makes everything small.
His race is as ineradicable as the flea-beetle; the last man lives longest.
“‘We have invented happiness,’ say the last men, and they blink. They have left the
regions where it was hard to live, for one needs warmth. One still loves one’s neighbor
and rubs against him, for one needs warmth.
“Becoming sick and harboring suspicion are sinful to them: one proceeds carefully. A
fool, whoever still stumbles over stones or human beings! A little poison now and then:
that makes for agreeable dreams. And much poison in the end, for an agreeable death.
“One still works, for work is a form of entertainment. But one is careful lest the
entertainment be too harrowing. One no longer becomes poor or rich: both require too
much exertion. Who still wants to rule? Who obey? Both require too much exertion.
“No shepherd and one herd! Everybody wants the same, everybody is the same. Whoever
feels different goes voluntarily into a madhouse.
“‘Formerly, all the world was mad,’ say the most refined, and they blink.
“One is clever and knows everything that has ever happened: so there is no end of
derision. One still quarrels, but one is soon reconciled—else it might spoil the digestion.
“One has one’s little pleasure for the day and one’s little pleasure for the night: but one
has a regard for health.
“‘We have invented happiness,’ say the last men, and they blink.” v
So here happiness appears as the idea of the last and the most despicable men, and at the
other pole there is something which Nietzsche calls creativity, creation, and in its highest
form the overman, the superman. I have been asked today before class by one of you:
what is underlying Nietzsche’s notion of the overman or the superman. Is this not just a
crazy notion? Well, for Nietzsche the situation of man is this: up to his time or shortly
before it, or, say, up to the French Revolution, men were always guided by the notion of
something superhuman, something to which man as man had to look up. This
superhuman was called in the most powerful tradition “God.” And now that is premise of
v

Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche, “Zarathustra’s Prologue,” chapter 5. The translation Strauss reads
here is reprinted in Thus Spoke Zarathustra: A Book for All and None, trans. Walter Kaufmann
(New York: The Modern Library, 1995), 17-18.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

74

the book Zarathustra: “quote God is dead unquote.” The consequence is that man has no
longer something to look up to, and therefore, the last man. It is the complete decay of
human greatness, of the possibility of human greatness. And therefore man himself must
strive to become superhuman. That is the meaning of superman. Man must take the place
of God, not by simply denying the superhuman, but by overcoming man himself; by
becoming, in a way, a divine being.
Was this of any use to you, Mr. West? What are your difficulties?
Student: I can understand that as a sort of goal toward which to look, but as a possibility,
as a human possibility in fact, it still seems to me—strikes one as implausible, a man who
is more than a man.
LS: Ya. Well, Nietzsche did not mean that there should be a new species which could not
breed with the human species, but he meant beings in the most important respect superior
to human beings hitherto. There is a formula in another writing of Nietzsche where he
says the overman or the superman is “Caesar with the soul of Christ.”vi Does this say
anything? In other words, a coming-together of the two great Western traditions: the
biblical and the classical, Graeco-Roman, on the highest level, but in a form which this
synthesis of Jerusalem and Athens had never taken before. And such a demand is rooted
in the view that anything short of that, any traditional ideal, is discredited by the
discrediting of the belief in superhuman beings in the old-fashioned sense of the word,
beings who are not man but are higher than man.
So after having reminded ourselves of the fact that the notion of happiness lacks today
the self-evidence which it had for Aristotle and for many, many centuries after Aristotle,
we return to our discussion of happiness in Aristotle in the first book, 1097b28. That is a
passage where Aristotle tries to give a precise determination of what happiness is by
looking at the work of man. —Mr. Pangle, come. We have a chair for you here. You
might perhaps begin at the beginning of this section. Aristotle turns to the work of man,
on the ground that in the case of man as man, as well as of that of the various artisans, the
good which we are seeking, the highest good, is found in the work. But is there a work of
man as man, a specific work of man? That is the question. Now read, please.
Reader:
To say however that the Supreme Good is happiness will probably appear a truism; we
still require a more explicit account of what constitutes happiness. Perhaps then we may
arrive at this by ascertaining what is man’s work.vii For the goodness or efficiency of a
flute-player or sculptor or craftsman of any sort, and in general of anybody who has some
function [some work—R]viii or business to perform, is thought to reside in that work; and
similarly it may be held that the good of man resides in the work of man, if he has a
work.ix (1097b22-28)
LS: So that is still a question, if he has a work. Yes?
Reader:

vi

The phrase appears in section 568 of Max Brahn’s 1917 edition of The Will to Power.
In Rackham’s translation: “man’s function.
viii
“Some work” is the reader’s interpolation.
ix
In Rackham’s translation: “reside in that function; and similarly it may be held that the good of
man resides in the function of man, if he has a function.”
vii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

75

Are we then to suppose that while the carpenter and shoemaker have definite works x or
businesses belonging to them, man as such has none, and is not designed by nature to
fulfill any function?
LS: More precisely, more simply, but is by nature workless; lazy. Why could there not be
a man by nature lazy? What does Aristotle mean by that? After all, we know so many
human beings who are lazy. Maybe they are according to nature beachcombers,
lassaroni, or what have you. Now what does Aristotle mean? He is sure that man is not
by nature a lazy being. “By nature” means here if man is in good order, not to say at his
best. And now he gives a closer proof in the immediate sequel.
Reader:
Must we not rather assume that, just as the eye, the hand, the foot and each of the various
members of the body manifestly has a certain work of its own, so a human being also has
a certain work over and above all the functions of his particular members? xi
LS: Now he uses the example of the various parts of man, at least of the human body
for . . . of the various arts, for the following reason: of the various arts one could say that
they are of merely human origin. Man devised the arts of shoemaking, of carpentry, and
so on, and therefore they would not throw any light on nature. But when we look at the
parts of the body and its natural parts, we see that the eye works, has a specific work, the
work of seeing; the hand, of grasping, and so on and so on. And then if all parts of man,
of the human body in the first place do reveal, show themselves to have a work, it is
plausible to assume that man as a whole has such a work. That is the argument.
This passage you might compare, if you have the time, with a section in the first book of
Plato’s Republic, 352d to 353e. Now?
Reader:
What then precisely can this workxii be? The mere act of living appears to be shared even
by plants, whereas we are looking for the workxiii peculiar to man; we must therefore set
aside the vital activity of nutrition and growth. (1097b28-1098a1)
LS: They are not specifically human, and therefore we cannot find in them the
specifically human work and therefore not the specifically human goodness of work, and
that specifically human goodness of work is the specifically human virtue. Yes?
Reader:
Next in the scale will come some form of sentient life; but this too appears to be shared
by horses, oxen, and animals generally. There remains therefore what may be called the
practical life of the rational part of man. (This part has two divisions, one rational as
obedient to principle, the other as possessing principle and exercising intelligence).
Rational life again has two meanings; let us assume that we are here concerned with the
active exercise of the rational faculty, since this seems to be the more proper sense of the
term. If then the function [the work—R]xiv of man is the active exercise of the soul’s
faculties in conformity with rational principle, or at all events not in disassociation from
x

In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
In Rackham’s translation: “a certain work of its own, so a human being also has a certain
work.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
xiii
In Rackham’s translationi: “function.”
xiv
In this passage “some work,” enclosed in brackets, is the reader’s interpolation.
xi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

76

rational principle, and if we acknowledge the function [the work—R] of an individual
and of a good individual of the same class (for instance, a harper and a good harper, and
so generally with all classes) to be generically the same, the qualification of the latter’s
superiority in excellence being added to the function in his case (I mean that if the workxv
of the harper is to play the harp, that of a good harper is to play the harp well): if this is
so, and if we declare that the work xvi of man is a certain form of life, and define that form
of life as the exercise of the soul’s faculties and activities in association with rational
principle, and say that the function of a good man is to perform these activities well and
rightly, and if a function is well performed when it is performed in accordance with its
own proper excellence—from these premises it follows that the Good of man is the active
exercise of his soul’s faculties in conformity with excellence or virtue, or if there be
several human excellences or virtues, in conformity with the best and the most perfect
among them. (1098a1-18)
LS: Now let us stop here for a moment. So the specific work of man must be the
“actuality,” what he translates as the “active exercise,” “of rational activity.” The word
used by Aristotle is logos, which he translates by “principle.” Not the best translation;
“reason” would be better. More literally it would be speech or discourse, but discourse
always presupposing thinking, reasoning.
There is one remark which is at first glance perhaps not intelligible, and that is when he
says that the work of this being and of this excellent being belong to the same genus, for
example, the carpenter: the indifferent carpenter and the good carpenter. Their works
belong to the same genus, and therefore by knowing the one, we know in principle the
other, and therefore there is no vicious transition from fact to value. If you know what the
work of a carpenter is—to make chairs, tables, and so on—then you know what the work
of a good carpenter is, namely, to make these things: good chairs, good tables, or
whatever the case may be. The same would apply to man: if I know what the specific
work of man is, namely, the use of reason, then I know that the good man would be a
man who uses reason well, because all human activity, however low and degraded and
disgusting, implies the use of reason. Man cannot help it, but he may use it ill or he may
use it indifferently.
Now this remark about the good and the indifferent belonging to the same genus is
underlying a passage in Plato’s Republic which is best understood in the light of the
Aristotelian passage we read. The passage is in the fourth book, 433a. Socrates says:
“What we laid down in the beginning as a universal requirement when we are founding
our city, this I think, or some kindxvii of this [one could also say some genus of this—LS],
is justice. What we did lay down was xviii that each one man must perform one servicexix in
the state for which his nature was best adapted.”xx In other words, we laid down that
everyone should do his job. That’s justice. Justice is doing one’s job or minding one’s
business, as one may also translate the Greek expression. But Socrates makes this crucial
qualification: this or some kind of this. The kind which he has in mind is of course to do
one’s job well, and justice means to do one’s job well. Merely to do one’s job

xv

In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
xvii
In Shorey’s translation: “form.”
xviii
In Shorey’s translation: “lay down, and often said, if you recall, was.”
xix
In Shorey’s translation: “one social service.”
xx
Strauss adopts the translation in The Republic, trans. Paul Shorey (Loeb Classical Library
edition) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1930), 367.
xvi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

77

indifferently, sloppily, or badly, that is not justice. This is the same thing which Aristotle
has in mind here.
So I made a slight mistake which I will now correct. “Or some kind of this”: the genus
comprises both doing well and doing in general. And the genus contains beneath it
various kinds: one kind is doing well, the other kind doing non-well, meaning ill or
indifferently. Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: I don’t understand that. For instance, you could say that one of the works of
man would be courageous. Can one be courageous well?
LS: No, here in “courageous” it is already implied that it is good.
Same Student: But, I mean—say, in the case of a carpenter . . . a lousy table—
LS: No, let us go step by step regarding the first example, courage. The quality which
does not yet imply goodness is: behaving towards fear. Man always must behave toward
fear, because fears arise all the time from various directions. And he can behave towards
fears rightly, according to reason, or wrongly, not according to reason. So behaving
towards fear is the genus consisting of the two species: behaving correctly and not
behaving correctly. And courage would be the correct behavior towards fear.
Same Student: I still don’t understand, because, for instance, behaving reasonably. How
can you behave reasonably well . . .
LS: That is a simple ambiguity of the word “reasonably.” “Reasonably” may mean, and
what we ordinarily mean by it is to use one’s reason properly. But even if we do not use
our reason properly, we act in another sense of the word reasonably, reasonably. Because
we are rational beings, we cannot help using our reason, even if we misuse it. We have as
it were the choice between using or misusing our reason; we do not have the choice of
acting purely instinctively, except in the lower parts of our being for which we have no
responsibility. Yes?
Student: Does that mean that there is no essential difference between a man who is able
to use his reason well and just a normal man who can’t reason too well? I mean, you
know, just the average guy?
LS: Yes, but Aristotle is here speaking also of average guys. This fine distinction—
Same Student: Yes, I know, but does that mean that there is no essential difference
between a philosopher and the—
LS: No, we do not know of that in this stage of the argument.
Same Student: Yes, but we know that there are some men who reason well and some
men who misuse reason.
LS: Yes, but here [by] reasoning well Aristotle thinks of, [in] the first place, the use of
reason regarding conduct, for example, regarding fears, regarding desires, regarding
money, and what have you. You must not anticipate these things.
Same Student: Are we to suppose that these classifications might not be valid
generally . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

78

LS: Oh no, they would be. I mean, that is the point. They would have to be refined
probably when we rise to a higher level; they would not simply disappear. In other words,
say, if you have on the simple moral level the extreme possibilities of the gentleman and
the crook, the fact that the philosopher is not a gentleman doesn’t mean that he is a crook.
Although he might in certain respects deviate from the gentleman in a way which a crook
would better understand than a gentleman [laughter], but for different reasons.
Same Student: Well, then is there an essential relationship between gentlemen and
crooks? I mean, are gentlemen in any way essentially different from crooks?
LS: Yes, most definitely. Otherwise the moral distinctions wouldn’t make sense.
Same Student: They might. I mean, you know, they might be both men, even though one
is a bad man. I mean, it doesn’t seem to me just on the face of it obvious that there’s an
essential difference between a man who is a murderer and a man who isn’t a murderer.
LS: Well, that is something more specific, because a man might be a murderer, or at least
a killer, without being a crook. Ya? So let us not take too narrow a notion. And let us,
perhaps since I spoke of crooks, let us remain on the same level of expression and speak
of squares. We imply that there is an essential difference between squares and crooks.
Now this distinction is ordinarily used not very thoughtfully and not very precisely. In
other words, we do not look too much into the heart of the two kinds of people, where we
might discover in the heart of the crook somewhere a pearl and in the heart of the square
a hard stone. You know, that might happen, but we cannot do this all the time. And if you
think especially about the questions with which we are confronted in legal matters, where
rather crude decisions must be made without indefinite appeals which would ruin
jurisdiction completely, therefore these crude distinctions are meaningful and necessary.
That is the point which Aristotle takes for granted. And the inexactness which goes with
it, of which he had spoken, we have to accept that, otherwise we cannot live. Yes?
Student: In searching for this rational activity or the peculiar function of man now,
Aristotle accepts as a reference point the cases of animals and plants, etc. to determine if
these are universal functions, or just peculiar functions . . . man. However, he seems to
automatically dismiss the possibility that these other plants and animals, for instance,
could possibly have their own peculiar activities. Did he just assume that man has a
peculiar activity?
LS: But the others also [do]. An oak is radically different from a birch or what have you.
That he does not deny. He only says [that] the specifically human cannot possibly lie in
what he shares with the plants. And the specifically human cannot possibly lie in what he
shares with the brutes, because he is not a plant and he is not a brute. He is the only
animal who possesses speech or reason.
Same Student: Yes, he’s saying that, but what is specifically human can’t be shared. But
isn’t he there assuming that if there is something specifically human—?
LS: He assumes that. Ya.
Same Student: How can he proceed to say that there is something specifically human?
How can he even try to assume that without also trying to show that perhaps plants and
animals also have something [. . .]
LS: Well, did you ever see plants speak to each other? Did you ever see dogs speak to
each other? You could say this only in a metaphoric way. Dogs seem to communicate—

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

79

or ducks, for that matter, seem to communicate some feelings to each other, but not
speakingly, and however much one may admire some of the animals (say, dogs), one
cannot seriously maintain that they are strictly speaking intelligent beings. The popular
phrase “dumb animals” or “our dumb friends,” testifies to the truth of what Aristotle says.
Same Student: He is assuming that under nature man has something peculiar to him,
whereas these other things in nature do not have something peculiar to them.
LS: Yes. I mean, well, look around. Look at stories—the true stories, I mean—ever told
of men, animals, or brutes, or plants. Where do you find philosophy, or science, or
religion, etc. among brutes? Some people say that elephants are pious, but I believe that
was a sentimental assertion [laughter] of a man who loved elephants.
Same Student: . . . plants and animals have some capability of rational thought or
anything peculiar to them in the same way that man has something peculiar to man, but
rather that plants and animals could have something of a different nature peculiar to
them.
LS: All right, there is an analogon of reason to some extent there, you can say. But an
analogon of reason is not reason strictly speaking. Mr. . . . ?
Student: We know that the work of the carpenter is to make a chair, and the work of the
good carpenter is to make a good chair; the worker of the harper, to play, and the work of
the good harper, to play well. And the work of man is virtue, the work—
LS: No, not virtue. The work of man is acting according to reason.
Same Student: acting according to reason, and the best work of man is acting according
to the highest reason. Now by what virtue, by what means does he think that we can
know what the best chair is, what good harp-playing is, what good painting is, and what
good reason is? Now how does he judge among these things?
LS: Well, did you never in your life see a blunderer in carpentry who produced a chair on
which you could not sit without falling down, or a table which was bound to collapse
when you put any weight on it? So you can see [that] not great experience of life is
needed, and great intelligence, in order to distinguish sufficiently for practical purposes
between a good carpenter and a poor carpenter. And the same applies to the other arts as
well. In the case of physicians it is a bit more complicated, because bedside manners
could conceivably deceive us about the quality of the physician. But still, in the long run,
you can say [LS chuckles] if all people whose legs were straightened by a surgeon never
had straight legs—and this happens all the time—you would say, well, I wouldn’t go to
him.
Same Student: On a commonsensical level, yeah.
LS: And why not the same [here]? Do we not distinguish between men who act
reasonably or sensibly and those who do not act reasonably, sensibly, men whose
judgment we have found invariably sound and others whose judgment we have found
invariably unsound? That exists. Take the extreme case. This thing we do.
If there is no universally valid yardstick by which you can measure sensibility as you can
measure temperature, that has to do with the quality of moral matters: imprecision.
Imprecision. But still there is not complete chaos there.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

80

Same Student: This doesn’t provide any guide at all by which we can judge between one
who acts quite reasonably and one who acts very, very reasonably.
LS: No, well, surely not in this stage. But we make distinctions. And we know that, for
example, a man may be excellent in an office as a subaltern man, and another man may
act excellently as the president of the United States. You know this difference. You know
also the difficulty of judging in this case of the president, whereas it is much easier to
reach agreement as to the subaltern officer, say, in a social security administration. So
there is a kind of lower level where agreement is easily reached, just as regarding a
carpenter or a shoemaker. And when things become more demanding, then it becomes
more difficult to judge. In other words, there is no substitute ultimately for judgment. But
judgment in certain dimensions is relatively easy and can conceivably be replaced by
mechanical devices, and in other spheres which are more important, when it can never be
replaced by mechanical devices.
Student: Well, when a carpenter is a bad carpenter, he nevertheless is a carpenter. When
a harpist is a bad harpist, he nevertheless is a bad harpest but harpist. Now what would
Aristotle do with men who are not capable of reason?
LS: Do you mean morons?
Same Student: No—well, yes.
LS: Well, what shall we do? I mean, they would not listen and would not read this book.
And they are generally out of circulation, you know. [Laughter] They have no influence
on human affairs; they are a great burden on the other members of their family, but—
Same Student: Are they men? Does Aristotle define man?
LS: No, they are defective. They are by nature radically defective human beings, so they
cannot even acquire virtue. He speaks of that fact. That is also a fact which we have to
acknowledge. Pardon?
Student: Natural slaves?
LS: No. Natural slaves would be wholly useless if they were enslaved. Natural slaves are
only very dumb. Aristotle understands by natural slave a man who has some reason,
because otherwise he couldn’t listen to the commands of his master. But—I mean, he can
listen to more specific commands than a dog whom you have trained, but he cannot take
care of himself. And therefore, for example—my example is a fellow to whom you have
to say, “You should now bring five tree trunks here, five: one, two, three, four, five.”
That is a natural slave. Yes?
Another Student: What would Aristotle say about a man reasoning and consequently not
accepting morality? Say, for instance like . . . sees that in different societies morals are
different. And he sees morality as a relative thing. So he says to himself: Well, I can’t
accept this moral point because, well, say, for instance, in this other society it isn’t like
this, and it’s basically a relative thing that I don’t accept.
LS: Yes, well, Aristotle would then say that this is a case not for moral instruction, but
either for correction by noninstructional means [laughter] or else a course in theoretical
philosophy, by which he would be shown that the conclusion from the variety of customs
to the nonunity of morality is not valid, because the relativity—for example, [from the
fact] that people have different usages regarding a great variety of things it does not

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

81

follow that all the various customs are of equal value. Why could not a single one, or two,
three, or four of these cultures have the true morality, where the others deviate from it to
various degrees? I mean, that was the way in which people looked at such matters in
former times. And therefore this fact, the variety of customs, was always known, but men
drew different conclusions from it in former times.
Well, Aristotle, you can say, starts from what he sees around himself. And that is of
course primarily Greek things, that is undeniable. But he did not view morality as a
Greek privilege. He would only say the Greeks were a particularly fortunate people. The
climate was the right mean between too hot and too cold—say, like central California, or
maybe even southern California. The Greeks had two things which he didn’t find
anywhere else: people living in cities and yet being politically free. In Babylon there was
also a city, but they were subject to a despotic ruler, and the same would be true of the
Persians. And the northern fellows in northern Greece and the Balkan peninsula, they had
political freedom in their way, but they were not citified, and that meant the same
originally as civilized. They were rustics. And therefore that would have been his
argument: that the Greeks, with all their great defects, which he saw very well, were
partly through merit, partly through good luck, in a better position to speak about these
matters than other people. But he wouldn’t deny that non-Greeks could learn that. That
would be a justification for the fact that he said that, on the whole, what the Greek wise
men say is taken more seriously by him than wise men of other tribes. Mr. . . .
Student: I was wondering if there was perhaps more than simply one specific difference
between man and other animals or plants; for example, perhaps his ability to produce
representations of what he sees might be considered unique to man.
LS: The question would be whether that does not imply or is not based upon discoursing.
That’s the question.
Same Student: Well, that’s the question. How would Aristotle—
LS: Well, an analysis. The question is whether imitation, as he calls it—whether
imitation, in the sense in which the arts imitate, does not presuppose reason. That would
be his way of arguing. Other things—[for example], it was always known that laughing is
a peculiarity of man. Now why did Aristotle not call man the laughing animal instead of
the rational animal? But he would say that laughing and weeping are extreme things and
presuppose a latitude of feelings which is possible only on the ground of rationality. You
can understand laughing on the ground of rationality; you cannot understand rationality
on the ground of laughing. Or to take another example, man is the animal which
possesses hands: two hands and two feet, as distinguished from four feet. Let us forget
about the birds. And Aristotle is confronted with this question: is man to be defined as a
being with hands, or as a being characterized by reason? He would say, “I can understand
the hands as essentially belonging to a rational being, and not the other way around.”
That it would be a complicated and an unnecessarily complicated attempt to make things
intelligible.
Same Student: So if someone were to say, as I believe some people have, that man’s
talent for speech would result in this imitative ability, that is he’s somehow—
LS: Well, linked up with it.
Same Student: But if he were to say speech were resting on imitation rather than vice
versa.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

82

LS: Aristotle would say that it is the other way around. If he were not a speaking animal,
he could not make this distinction between the image and the imaged on which all
imitation is based.
Same Student: But that, it seems to me, requires a more detailed—
LS: Oh, sure. There is no question. But Aristotle here can at any rate say [that] he appeals
to things generally granted, i.e., not universally granted. And we all understand them
from our ordinary life. And that is sufficient at least for the beginning.
So Aristotle asserts then that there is a specific work of man, and that is action with
reason or according to reason. And therefore, since there is a specific work of man, there
is also a specific good work of man. The good work is to use one’s reason well, in the
various forms in which reason can be used. Aristotle alludes to these differences by
saying that there may be more than one kind of human goodness. And then the highest
kind would be then the ultimately authoritative. What that highest kind would be he
doesn’t say here, but as we know from the end of this work, it is theoretical knowledge or
philosophy. Now let us go on.
Reader:
Moreover this activity must occupy a complete lifetime; for one swallow does not make a
spring, nor does one fine day; and similarly one day or a brief period of happiness does
not make a man supremely blessed and happy.
LS: So a man who does the specific work of man well in a life of some length—let us say
in a completed life only—is happy. In other words, a child which has not been able to
acquire these capacities, or young men or women dying prematurely, as we say, cannot
be properly called blessed or happy. Some maturity is required. Only in this way can an
individual show that he possesses human excellence. Yes?
Reader:
Let this account then serve to describe the Good in outline—for no doubt the proper
procedure is to begin by making a rough sketch, and to fill it in afterwards. If a work has
been well laid down in outline, to carry it on and complete it in detail may be supposed to
be within the capacity of anybody; and in this working out of detail Time seems to be a
good inventor or at all events assistant. xxi This indeed is how advances in the arts have
actually come about, since anyone can fill in the gaps. (1098a18-25)
LS: Good. So you see Aristotle says here now explicitly that what he has given us is only
a sketch, an outline. And to fill it out: he says anybody is good enough for that, which is
of course a great compliment to us which we do not probably deserve. But the sketch he
nevertheless says is most important, as he says later on. The beginning is half of the
whole. Now the remark about time: time is good. It is a helper in this respect. There is in
the fourth book of his Physics, where he discusses time thematically, [a remark that] time
is presented rather as bad, as a cause of forgetting and of decay. And various kinds of
conclusions were drawn from this remark on time, but what Aristotle has in mind is [that]
everything depends on how time is used. If you use it well, it will be helpful to you; if
you do not use it [well], it will bring about decay and degeneration. Yes?

xxi

In Rackham’s translation: “coadjutor.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

83

Student: If, as you mentioned earlier, the things like the universe, the cosmos, and the
species, and things are eternal—how can then you say that something like time is good or
bad . . .
LS: Aristotle doesn’t say that, but Aristotle seems to say it in his analysis of time in the
Physics. And therefore I make this remark that our passage shows that Aristotle does not
regard time as bad or the cause of badness.
Same Student: No, but, I mean, time somehow makes a difference. If you have things
like decay and things, a species doesn’t remain the same thing, does it?
LS: Why not? I mean, every dog grows and decays. And that happens all the time, and
yet this doesn’t affect the species because the eternity of the species means the
noneternity of the individuals. And noneternity means mortality.
Same Student: Are we to assume then that individual men are as insignificant as
individual dogs?
LS: This does not follow, but [men are] as mortal as dogs.
Same Student: No, but I mean if we judge somehow by the eternity of things and by the
species—whether men die or don’t die, doesn’t affect that—does [it follow] that men are
somehow unimportant or that it is insignificant whether men die?
LS: In the light of what? Every human being, I suppose, has other human beings to
whom he is attached, and their death will be very sad for him. That if some old man, or
even a young man, for that matter, at the other end of the world dies, it would be
hypocrisy to shed tears about his death, would it not? You can’t really be sad about that,
if some man wholly unknown to you dies. I do not know what you mean.
Same Student: I just wanted to know whether individuals are significant in any way.
LS: In what sense significant? I mean, you are yourself very significant to yourself, I
suppose, and to your friends. But not all human beings can be significant to all human
beings. Or can they?
Same Student: I think, well, from the standpoint of, say, I would imagine, although I’m
not sure of it, from the standpoint of, let’s say, Christian thought they could be: each
individual could be . . .
LS: If the word usually translated by “neighbor,” is this not an accident? In other words,
can a man actively love people of whom he has never heard and whom he never sees? It
is a difficult question.
Same Student: Yes, it is.
LS: Yes. For Aristotle, at any rate, there is no question here. Love of human beings (in
Greek, philanthropia) is not a virtue according to the Greek philosophers, surely not
Plato and Aristotle. That is a charming quality in most cases, but it is not a virtue. And
what about you?
Student: Well, I was . . .
LS: Yes, I know.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

84

Student: It seems that perhaps the concept of God’s love of all men in Christian thought
does indicate something which all men are not capable of but must aspire to, that it is a
quality that is not—
LS: Yes, but this is said of God: of a superhuman being and not of man.
Student: Realizing this, realizing the common fatherhood of God . . . can’t actively love
every individual but can theoretically know that every individual—
LS: No, the question is whether man, confronted with any other man, regardless of ethnic
origin, race, or what have you, whether man is not under certain obligations toward other
human beings whom he knows—whom he meets, at least. Aristotle would say say yes.
[He] does say yes. But that does not mean that he can actively love all human beings.
That’s beyond his power. Good. Now Mr. Pangle, let us go on where we left off.
Reader:
We should therefore proceed in the same manner in other subjects also, and not allow
side issues to outweigh the main task in hand.
LS: Let us stop here. So in other words, the whole question which he has already taken
up twice, now for the third time, concerning the exactness to be expected in moral
matters. He had used before the term exactness, opposed to a sketch, to a general or
abstract statement. But “exact” means now “the concrete and detailed elaboration.” The
abstract statement is to that extent inexact. That is also one meaning of “exact” in
Aristotle.
Now here this statement which we began to read is the third and final statement about
how to speak on moral matters, or what kind of exactness to expect. Generally speaking,
we see here that Aristotle’s way of speaking and thinking in this work is more like that of
the carpenter than like that of the geometer, the mathematician. Is this clear? The
carpenter is satisfied with a straight line which is not literally and strictly speaking
straight but is perfectly sufficient for his purposes. And the same applies to moral
matters: an exactness in accordance with the nature of the subject matter. Now this much
is said by Aristotle here about exactness. Now he has something to add to that.
Reader:
Nor again must we in all matters alike demand an explanation of the reason why things
are what they are; in some cases it is enough if the fact that they are so is satisfactorily
established. This is the case with first principles; and the fact is the primary thing—it is a
first principle. And principles are studied—some by induction, others by perception,
others by some form of habituation, and also others otherwise; so we must endeavor to
arrive at the principles of each kind in their natural manner, and must also be careful to
define them correctly, since they are of great importance for the subsequent course of the
enquiry. The beginning is admittedly more than half of the whole, and throws light at
once on many of the questions under investigation. (1098a31-b8)
LS: Yes. Now after having spoken of the exactness to be expected, he comes to the
question of the causes or principles. Now only this question, not the question regarding
exactness, was dealt with in the second and central statement, 1095a30 following. In the
first statement he had spoken only of exactness, and not of principles. Here he speaks of
both. In this statement, there is no allusion to the fact, as there was in the second
statement, that we might need knowledge of “the why.” Here he simple leaves it at “the
that.” It is enough. What he alludes to is this: the highest principle is the principle of

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

85

contradiction. If you know that it is impossible to say at the same time that A is B and A
is non-B, that’s perfectly sufficient; you don’t need a why for that. The question is
whether the same can be applied to morals; more specifically, whether it is good enough
to say [that] courage is a virtue. And that’s our starting point: whether it doesn’t make
sense to say why is courage a virtue, or why is courage a good. [This is] the question
which we have discussed earlier.
Now the principles may be found in various ways: by induction, he says, by sense
perception, and by habituation. Thomas Aquinas gives these examples: that every number
is odd or even is found by induction. You look at every number which occurs to you and
you see that it is either odd or even. That every living thing needs nourishment is known
by sense perception. And that lusts are diminished if we do not give in to them is known
by habituation; for example, by ceasing to smoke. That is Thomas’s example of that.xxii
Good. Now let us begin with the next section.
Reader:
Accordingly we must examine our first principle not only as a logical conclusion deduced
from certain premises but also in the light of the current opinions on the subject. (1098b911)
LS: What is a “logical” conclusion as distinguished from a conclusion which is not
logical? I think it is a wholly redundant expression. I mean, it may be a wrong
conclusion, but every conclusion is of course an act of our concluding faculty, i.e.,
logical. That’s not necessary.
Aristotle says—in the preceding passage he had inferred what happiness is by starting
from such principles as: every being has a specific work, and this work may be done by
the individual well or not well. These were principles from which he started, by starting
from which he arrived at the conclusion that happiness consists in excellent activity
according to reason. Now he will check the result not by “opinions,” as he translates, but
by what people say. People who have never taken the trouble of establishing definitely
what happiness is, as Aristotle has done in the preceding chapter, nevertheless have
opinions about happiness. And these opinions are available to everybody through what
people say, and therefore we must see what people say and whether this agrees with what
Aristotle has established in a more exact manner. For Aristotle assumes, and this
assumption he will make clear later on, that what people say cannot be simply absurd.
That may sound strange because there is such a great variety of opinions, and some must
certainly be wrong, yet Aristotle has a certain respect for what people say, given some
conditions. In other words, he will make clear later on [that] if they say it for a very long
time, that means it cannot be a momentary fad or whim. That can be nonsense. Or if the
men who say it are wise men, then it stands to reason that it cannot be simply wrong.
Now let us see what these sayings are.
Reader:
Now things good have been divided into three classes, external goods on the one hand,
and goods of the soul and of the body on the other; and of these three kinds of goods,
those of the soul we commonly pronounce good in the fullest sense and supreme. xxiii
LS: “We pronounce.” You see, Aristotle is one of the speakers. Aristotle in his capacity
as a simple man which he also has, apart from being a philosopher. Yes?
xxii
xxiii

See Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §137.
In Rackham’s translation: “fullest sense and highest degree.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

86

Reader:
But it is our actions and the soul’s active exercise of its functions that we posit (as being
Happiness); hence so far as this opinion goes—and it is of long standing, and generally
accepted by philosophersxxiv—it supports the correctness of our definition of Happiness.
(1098b12-18)
LS: Yes, now let us see. What are then these things said by human beings? First, the
tripartition of the good things: the good things of the soul at the highest; and then those of
the body; and then the external goods. Now actions, activities, belong to the soul and not
to the body or to external things. The body does not properly act because the body
doesn’t choose, and therefore it cannot act. The core of action according to Aristotle, as
he will make clear later on, is preferring, choosing. And choosing is the prerogative of the
soul. Now this opinion is old, of long standing, and if it had been merely a stupid view,
then it would have been abandoned a long time ago, and [it is] accepted by the people
who philosophize. Yes?
Student: This may be inappropriate here, but what is the ground for this assumption of a
harmony between popular opinion or common opinion and, say, philosophical opinion?
LS: Under what condition does this make sense? That’s a very relevant, pertinent
question. No apology needed. Now if it is true that man is a rational animal, and if reason
is to some extent always active in men in general, to some extent, then the results of
so-to-speak uncultivated reason, but still active reason, will not completely run counter to
the results of a highly cultivated reason.
Same Student: This assumption seems to be based on something beyond the scope of
this treatise.
LS: No. Well, what Aristotle does is this; you can also explain it as follows. Someone
presents a view which in this form was never presented before. And then, if he is not a
fool who wants to be admired as an original man, you know, who said something unheard
of, then he will say: What I say is after all not so strange as it seems at first glance. What
we all say, you all admit this, and this, and this; if you look at more closely, implies what
I said. Kant, when he sets forth his very original moral teaching claims that he only
elucidates, analyzes, brings to light, what every human being, when he says, “This is
right or this is wrong,” always implies.
Same Student: Would, say, what is sometimes called Plato’s taking refuge in speech, or
Plato’s doctrine of the second voyage—would Aristotle’s assumption be essentially the
same as that?
LS: There is something very much Platonic or Socratic in Aristotle. Plato has this notion,
as you know, stated somewhat in an image: that man is the only being on earth who has
seen the complete truth—and what for Plato means the same thing, the ideas—prior to his
birth. Man could not be man without a divination of the truth. And therefore this
divination of the truth shows itself in the opinions of men in general. And therefore it is
possible, according to Plato at any rate, by starting from any opinion, however crude and
half-cooked or however it may be, starting from it and seeing its effects, and thus to be
led to the full truth. One can state it properly as follows. I mean, apart from people who
want to be original, or want to win an argument, or try to defend a particular thesis, as
xxiv

In Rackham’s translation: “students of philosophy.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

87

Aristotle puts it, what people say, especially in their unguarded moments about matters
not directly connected with their personal interests of the moment, 3 this always contains
sense. Not theories: theories are a particular matter. Theories can very well be absolutely
wrong.
Student: In your first lecture, you said that Aristotle leaves it open—it seems for
Aristotle that man is definitely not the highest thing in the universe—you said he seems
to leave it open as to whether he is in a way a key to the universe, and—
LS: Yes. I think he says so, in a way. He says in one of his works that the soul—and he
means here from the context the human soul—is open to everything, i.e., the god, as
Aristotle understands that, would not perceive any beings lower than god. Yes? Man
would perceive the divine as well as the human, as well as the subhuman. In this sense
man is the microcosm. Although Aristotle doesn’t use the term, he means that.
Same Student: Just one more—
LS: Yes.
Same Student: Is this connected with why you said the Ethics may be Aristotle’s most
beautiful book?
LS: No, that I would not say, but I think it is precisely because of its less technical
character. It is least a book for classrooms, you know. It is meant for the general educated
reader, but it is also written in such a way that people who want to have more than the
general educated reader wants will find it. This peculiar combination I believe
characterizes the Ethics, whereas the Physics, or On the Heavens and so, that would not
for the general reader. Now let us read a bit more.
Reader:
It also shows it to be right merely in declaring the End to consist in actions or activities of
some sort, for thus the End is included among goods of the soul, and not among external
goods. (1098b18-20)
LS: So in other words, one could say this. Some people say happiness consists in just
living well, meaning an extraordinary dinner every night and all other pleasures of life at
all times, and not—in other words, in what you get, what you receive, and not in actions,
and activities, and actualizations. Aristotle says that this Aristotelian view agrees with
what is said, according to which the highest things are in the soul 4 and do not belong to
the external goods. That will become clearer from the immediate sequel. Yes?
Reader:
Again, our definition accords with the description of the happy man as one who ‘lives
well’ or ‘does well’; for it has virtually identified happiness with the form of the good
lifexxv or doing well.
LS: Ya. Well, “doing well” is of course ambiguous, as [it is] in English, and can mean
being successful whether you have deserved it or not. But doing well in the Greek can
also mean “doing well,” literally: “acting well,” so that happiness consists in acting well.
This thing, said so frequently, confirms again Aristotle’s definition. Yes?

xxv

In Rackham’s translation: “a form of good life.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

88

Reader:
And moreover all the various characteristics that are looked for in happiness are found to
belong to the Good as we define it. Some people think happiness is goodness or virtue,
others prudence, others a form of wisdom; others again say it is all of these things, or one
of them, in combination with pleasure, or not without pleasure; xxvi another school include
external prosperity as a concomitant factor. Some of these views have been held by many
people and from ancient times, others by a few distinguished men, and neither class is
likely to be altogether mistaken; the probability is that their beliefs are at least partly, or
indeed mainly, correct.
LS: Now here he gives the reason for which some of you have looked [as to] why the
opinions of longstanding [endurance] as well as the opinions of distinguished men are not
likely to be altogether wrong. Otherwise he shows here many things said about happiness
which seem to be mutually exclusive, because some people say happiness is identical
with virtue, some people say happiness is identical with wisdom, and some say it must be
accompanied by pleasure or at least not accompanied by pain. These are very different
views, and seemingly mutually exclusive views. And Aristotle will now show that they
are provided for and taken account of in his statement on happiness in the preceding
chapter. Yes. Let us read one more passage. Yes?
Reader:
Now with those who pronounce happiness to be virtue, or some particular virtue, our
definition is in agreement; for ‘activity in conformity with virtue’ involves virtue. But no
doubt it makes a great difference whether we conceive the Supreme Good to depend on
possessing virtue or on displaying it—on disposition, or on the manifestation of a
disposition in action. For a man may possess the disposition without its producing any
good result, as for instance when he is asleep, or has ceased to function from some other
cause; but virtue in active exercise cannot be inoperative—it will of necessity act, and act
well. And just as at the Olympic games the wreaths of victory are not bestowed upon the
handsomest and strongest persons present, but on men who enter for the competitions—
since it is among these that the winners are found,—so it is those who act rightly who
carry off the prizes and good things of life. (1098b20-1099a7)
LS: Ya. Now the main point which he makes here: he agrees in a way with those who say
happiness is virtue, but not entirely. He says they don’t make sufficiently clear that it is
the activity according to virtue, and not merely the possession of virtue, which may
remain dormant. And he compares this difference to that between possession and use: the
possession of shoes and the use of shoes, and analogously, the possession of virtue in a
dormant condition (leave it at home, as it were) and the use of it. And the latter alone is
what Aristotle understands by virtue: the exercise of virtue. The Greek word is energeia,
from which the English word energy is ultimately derived. But the Greek word has
nothing to do with energy in the modern sense. It means, literally translated, “being-atwork”; being-at-work as distinguished from a mere potency or potentiality.
Now Aristotle, in the sequel that we cannot discuss today, takes up a subject of which he
had not spoken in his own statement on happiness, which is nevertheless very important.
Many people say a happy man is a man who has pleasures, or at least who doesn’t live in
pain all the time. Now this subject [is] not considered apparently in the general definition
in the preceding chapter. The word “pleasure” didn’t occur there at all. This he takes up
in the sequel. Must we not assert that the happy man, apart from exercising the virtues, is
also a man whose life is enjoyable? After all, it is thinkable that man would fulfill his
xxvi

In Rackham’s translation: “or accompanied by pleasure as an indispensable adjunct.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 6

89

duties very strictly and honestly, and yet at the same time be very miserable. And that
would bring about that he is torn between two things: duty and pleasure. And what
Aristotle will now show in his way is that this cannot be the case, that there is in
happiness the three things which man desires: the good, the noble, and the pleasant are all
three present. Or as we could say, to make this distinction a bit more intelligible: the
enjoyable, the resplendent, that’s the noble; and the solid, rocklike, that’s the good. All
three combined on the highest level possible for man: that is happiness. And that he will
show in the sequel.
1

Deleted “the.”
Deleted “are.”
3
Deleted “that.”
4
Deleted “in the soul.”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

90

Session 7: March 4, 1968
Leo Strauss: So now let us continue where we left off last time. Aristotle had answered
the question of what happiness or the human good is. It is the being-at-work of the soul in
the mode of excellence; of course, the human soul. Now after Aristotle had answered this
question by himself, he looks at what people generally say about happiness, because it is
improbable that the meaning of happiness, the end of all men, has completely escaped the
human race. And therefore, while the general views may be less neat, less exact, they yet
must reflect the truth as stated by Aristotle. And we have read the larger part of this
section, and we should continue now at 1099a7, roughly, which we read already last time.
I have already mentioned at the end of the last meeting that Aristotle takes now up a
subject of which he had not spoken when presenting his definition of happiness. And that
theme is pleasure. Now will you begin to read again the few lines we read last time?
Reader:
And further, their lifei is essentially pleasant. For the feeling of pleasure is an experience
of the soul, and a thing gives a man pleasure in regard to which he is described as ‘fond
of’ so-and-so: for instance a horse gives pleasure to one fond of horses, a play to one fond
of the theatre, and similarly just actions are pleasant to the lover of justice, and acts
conforming with virtue generally to the lover of virtue.
LS: Go on.
Reader:
But whereas for the many pleasures are in conflict with one another, because they are not
pleasant by nature,ii things pleasant by nature are pleasant to lovers of what is noble, and
so always are actions in conformity with virtue, so that they are pleasant essentially as
well as pleasant to lovers of the noble. Therefore their life has no need of pleasure as a
sort of ornamental appendage, but contains its pleasure in itself. (1099a7-16)
LS: Yes, let us stop here. So Aristotle has now settled this question regarding the relation
between happiness and pleasure. And the question is whether this settlement is sufficient
or adequate. Aristotle makes here the distinction between two kinds of pleasures:
pleasures of pleasant things which are by nature pleasant, intrinsically pleasant. and those
which are not. Now it is clear that the virtuous man does not necessarily have more
pleasures of the vulgar kind than the vicious man. But Aristotle contends [that] the true
pleasures, the pleasures according to nature, are a preserve of the virtuous man, and
therefore he alone has a truly pleasant life. In other words, the pleasant life of gangsters is
not truly pleasant; that is a sham pleasure. That is what Aristotle here implies. Only for
the lovers of noble things are the things by nature pleasant in fact pleasant. Now granted
that truly virtuous men enjoy their virtuous activity and that this enjoyment is the only
true enjoyment (that is what Aristotle presupposes here), does it follow from this that
i

In Rackham’s translation: “the life of active virtue.”
In Rackham’s translation: “But whereas the mass of mankind take pleasure in things that
conflict with one another, because they are not pleasure of their own nature.”
ii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

91

these activities are the only ones by nature enjoyable? Why should not pleasant food,
pleasant drink, and so on be by nature enjoyable, for example? Now let us see what
conclusions Aristotle draws from this.
Reader:
For there is the further consideration that the man who does not enjoy doing noble actions
is not a good man at all: no one would call a man just if he did not like acting justly, nor
liberal if he did not like doing liberal things, and similarly with the other virtues. But if
so, actions in conformity with virtue must be essentially pleasant.
LS: That makes sense, that a man who doesn’t enjoy noble actions is not a noble
character. But the question is: are these enjoyments the highest enjoyments, or are they
the only enjoyments by nature enjoyable? This is the question.
In addition, there is the following difficulty. Let us take a man who denounces a friend
who has become a traitor to the authorities. This is a just action or may be a just action. Is
this an enjoyable action? Hardly. So there will be at least some virtuous actions which are
not enjoyable, where one can say, “It is my damn duty to do it, but I hate it. I do not
enjoy it.” You see also that Aristotle has here made a qualification in the last sentence
read by Mr. Pangle: “If this is so.” We have to be watchful. Yes?
Reader:
But they are also of course both good and noble, and each in the highest degree, if the
good man judges them well:iii and his judgment is as we have said. It follows therefore
that happiness is at once the best, the noblest, and the pleasantest of things: these qualities
are not separated as the inscription at Delos makes out—
The noblest is the most just, and the best is to be healthy,
But the most pleasant by nature is the attaining of what someone loves. iv
for the best activities possess them all; and it is the best activities, or one activity which is
the best of all, in which according to our definition happiness consists. (1099a17-31)
LS: Yes. The virtuous activities are pleasant to the highest degree and noble to the
highest degree and good to the highest degree. Or, as we may paraphrase it, not to leave it
in these terms which have been so frequently used and have become stale: the virtuous
activities are the most enjoyable, the most resplendent, and the most solid. So all three
considerations of preference lead us to one and the same end. And of course the proper
judge of what is most enjoyable and so on is the serious man, to translate the Greek word
literally, which is one of the many terms Aristotle uses for the virtuous man.v The serious
man, un homme sérieux in French, has sometimes this meaning: a man one must take
seriously.
iii

In Rackham’s translation: “judges them rightly.”
In Rackham’s translation: “Justice is noblest, and health is best,/But the heart’s desire is the
pleasantest—”
v
In Greek: spoudaios.
iv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

92

Now the question of course is—he has a reference to these activities or one of them,
namely, the best of them, is what we assert to be happiness. This is again a reference to a
distinction within the excellent activities, which will prove to be the distinction between
moral actions and contemplative actions, and the question is whether Aristotle can make
his assertion stick regarding moral virtues. Perhaps in the case of the moral virtues, the
coincidence of the enjoyable, the resplendent, and the good is not as clear as in the case
of contemplation. We have not yet sufficient evidence for that.
At any rate, there is a perfect harmony regarding the preferences which we human beings
have. They all coincide, contrary to this inscription, where a distinction is made between
what is noble—the most noble is the most just; the more solid, or good is to have good
health, and obviously these are two very different things. Finally, the most pleasant is to
get what one desires. Three entirely different things. And Aristotle says now [that] if you
think each of them through, then you will arrive at one and only one goal: the highest
human activity. Now let us continue that.
Reader:
Nevertheless it is manifest that happiness also requires external goods in addition, as we
said; for it is impossible, or at least not easy, to play a noble part unless furnished with
the necessary equipment. For many noble actions require instruments for their
performance, in the shape of friends or wealth or political power; also there are certain
external advantages, the lack of which sullies supreme felicity, such as good birth, good
children,vi and personal beauty: a man of very ugly appearance or low birth, or alone in
the world and childless,vii is not a happy man,viii and still less so perhaps is one who has
children or friends that are worthless, or one who has had good ones but lost them by
death. As we said therefore, happiness does seem to require the addition of external
prosperity, and this is why some people identify it with good fortune (though some
identify it with virtue). (1099a31-b8)
LS: So in other words, this beautiful coincidence of the three considerations is not good
enough, because in order to be happy man does need external goods. And these external
goods are not necessarily given with the fact of virtue or virtuous intentions, and
therefore there is a difficulty again, not identical with the distinction between virtue and
pleasure, but it is a distinction between virtue and the external goods—or equipment, as
Aristotle calls it—without which virtuous activity is not possible. And Aristotle goes here
quite far, as you see, for example, [saying] that there is a minimum need for external
goods necessary in order to act virtuously. For example, a man who [is] completely
paralyzed in body and mind cannot possibly act virtuously. That we understand. But that
the man also who is extremely ugly, bodily ugly, is by this very fact barred from being
happy seems not to coincide with what we now hold, although I think with a little effort
we understand it, because we always see, when we are confronted with extreme ugliness,
our simple reaction to that: we are repelled. And of course we can control it as tolerably
vi

In Rackham’s translation: “satisfactory children.”
In Rackham’s translation: “childless and alone in the world.”
viii
In Rackham’s translation: “not our idea of a happy man.”
vii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

93

decent people, but that we have to control it shows that that is not exactly what we
understand by human perfection. The other examples are perhaps less striking. Good.
So the question is, therefore: can the highest good, can happiness consist in virtuous
activity alone, if this is the case? The enjoyment of these good things is by nature good,
but pleasures deriving from noble actions are not sufficient for happiness. This much
Aristotle made clear. Now people have found a way out, as Aristotle indicates at the end
of this passage: they say happiness is the same as having good luck. For example, to be
wealthy and have good looks: these are gifts of fortune. But of course then you don’t
have virtue here. The alternative view is [that] happiness is virtue, but the fact that these
views are radically distinguished from each other shows that the problem of happiness
has not yet been solved, although what Aristotle said in the preceding chapter in his own
name will remain true, with some qualifications toward which Aristotle works his way.
Now is there any point you would like to raise here? Yes, Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: Why doesn’t Aristotle give us any ways to, say, improve our way—our means
of . . . situation, that is to say, why doesn’t he give us ways of improving our life?
LS: Yes, but that is exactly the point. The tychē, chance, cannot be handled. The simple
example which Aristotle gives when he discusses chance thematically in the second book
of the Physics is this: you dig in your garden, and then you find a treasure.ix Now how
can you—I mean, you can go treasure hunting, but then of course it is no longer a matter
of chance if you find a treasure. But the point is that without intending it, you find it.
Chance is that which is radically elusive and cannot be mastered. You mean ways to
improve one’s fortune? Well, there are some ways, for example, buy the right kind of
stocks, but no one would say then that this is just a—
Same Student: But when you dig in the garden, you keep an eye out for treasure chests.
LS: Yes, but the point is then that this is already no longer mere chance. Two people
meet “by chance”: that means they did not intend to meet. The one went downtown for
this reason, the other [for] an entirely different reason, no agreement whatever. And yet
their ways cross: this is wholly unintended and unintendable. That is characteristic of
chance. And therefore your objection is not valid. Mr. Shulsky?
Mr. Shulsky: Well, but . . . sort of survives in the sense that Aristotle attributes here this
type of equipment that’s necessary simply to chance. One can argue that as far as at least,
you know, money is concerned, that’s not simply a result of chance.
LS: Yes, but it is not strictly speaking chance. Does he ascribe it to chance?
Mr. Shulsky: Well, I thought that’s what you said, that these things would result only in
chance . . .

ix

See Aristotle, Metaphysics 1025a14-19.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

94

LS: No. I mean, they are not inherent in virtuous action. They are conditions. Chance
enters somehow, but they are not simply [the result of chance], because man has some
influence over some of these things, for example, on his wealth. Some men are very
clever and others are less clever in acquiring money. Yes?
Student: Aristotle assumes that a man can’t be called happy merely because he says he
feels happy . . .
LS: Sure. No.
Same Student: You wouldn’t call a man who said he’s happy, happy.
LS: No. Because sometimes people say it without believing it themselves.
Same Student: Or also what if they believe it? What reason does he give? If someone
actually believes he’s happy, feels happy, dances around and everything else, what reason
would he give for calling a man unhappy who says he’s perfectly happy? Plato does the
same thing, although he uses slightly different terms, but he gives what appears to be a
more satisfying reason: there are certain parts of the soul, and certain parts of the soul
here are fostered by this, they are not fostered by that, and so on and so forth.
LS: Aristotle does the same. But still, I think your question is a necessary one, because
our word “happiness” in the present-day meaning is not identical with the meaning of the
Greek word. We would not hesitate, for instance, to call children happy, or even puppies
happy, and Aristotle would flatly deny that. Now one can perhaps state it as follows,
trying to translate what they imply into our language: a happy man is a satisfied man.
Yes. But a moron may be perfectly satisfied. You know sometimes they smile all the day.
They are perfectly satisfied. And Aristotle says no one in his senses would call him
happy. Why? Because by happiness we understand such a satisfaction as is enviable in
the view of a sensible man. So an enviable satisfaction: this is happiness. And only in a
nonliteral sense can we say we envy animals, dumb animals. We don’t wish to be
animals. You only have to think it through. It may seem to be very attractive to be a
puppy and to have a wonderful master, but the trouble is that you do not have any control
if that master dies or gets ill whether you will be sent to the pound, or God knows what.
So you only have to think it through and it proves to be an unwise proposition to be a
puppy. And the same applies to other considerations.
And regarding a child, well, Aristotle makes this clear: a child is at best happy by
promise; and only a kind of sentimentality, to which we modern men are very much
given, would induce us to say, “Oh, children, they’re beautiful.” The beauty of childhood,
you know, with all the promises, and they do not yet know how few of them will be kept,
so this is largely based on a illusion. So let us take a somewhat more manly and sober
view of the situation, and then we will find happiness only among adult people who
fulfill the decisive condition: that they are doers of noble things.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

95

Same Student: But this seems to be begging the question a little bit. If happiness is such
a satisfaction as is enviable by the spoudaios, then it appears that that only transposes the
question to: what is the spoudaios? What is the nature of the spoudaios?
LS: Ya, but do we not avoid this circle by saying that the spoudaios is a man whose soul
is at work in the mode of excellence, as Aristotle said before?
Student: . . . every man happy . . . same thing that . . . make every other man happy.
Take, for instance, the example of a king . . . a virtuous king . . . and yet he does not
desire the office, and a lot of the other people will envy him for holding that office and it
seems as though a man can be unhappy when he is in a position where another man
would be very happy and—
LS: Sure. There is no doubt about it, but we are speaking of happiness which is enviable
by a sensible man. Now a sensible man would not envy kings as kings, or for that matter
presidents, because there are also quite a few things in the president’s life, as you will
surely have seen from the daily papers, which are not enviable, [but rather are] enormous
responsibilities. Yes?
Student: . . . Does he say that among sensible people there is a uniformity . . .
LS: Ultimately, yes. Aristotle is not “quote, an individualist, unquote,” in the sense in
which you mean it, and I would say that as long as people talked of virtue, people were
not individualists in that sense. There is one and only one ultimate standard of human
excellence, and individuality does not affect it. It may be [that], say, the virtue of X may
be colored by his psychophysiological makeup. That is true, but this is uninteresting. The
interesting thing for him is to be an excellent man. Whether Pericles’s excellence differs
from that of Aristides, that is a secondary question. The main point is that they are
excellent men. And there may be differences: one may be more excellent than the other.
Then it becomes interesting because of the difference of degrees but not [because of] the
individuality as individuality. They simply assume that we all are individuals by nature,
and our education or formation consists in our assimilating ourselves to one and the same
standard. What does it mean, the formula “to assimilate oneself to God”? If that is the
most important thing, obviously the preservation of individuality is a strictly tertiary
consideration. That is so. Yes?
Student: May I rephrase my other question?
LS: Sure.
Same Student: The Ethics is to some extent a book which will show at least a certain
kind of man how to be happy. If happiness requires external goods, then why doesn’t
Aristotle show in some way how external goods can be easily acquired?
LS: Well, that would be the matter of a special discipline, to which he refers, called
economics: the management of the household or the acquisition of wealth.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

96

Same Student: But wouldn’t it be also a part of political science, part of [it] being the
way to be happy?
LS: Yes, but political economy, as we call it, plays a very subordinate role in Aristotle, as
in classical thought altogether. He would simply say [that] the experienced statesman will
know how to raise revenue and how to spend it for the greatest benefit of the community
and so. It is a very special consideration to which Aristotle has not given much place in
his work. Then from the same point of view, one could say this: that since from
Aristotle’s point of view the most decent way of earning a livelihood is by husbandry,
then Aristotle should teach the gentleman how to farm and how to raise cattle, which
Aristotle never did. It so happens that Xenophon, who belonged to the same world, did
write a treatise on gentlemanship, which contains a section on how to farm; for example,
one must cast the seed evenly and not unevenly. You know? But it is no longer explained
how you can learn that; you are only told you must learn that. Mr. Fielding?
Student: I’m struck by a difficulty, or at least apparent difficulty, with the distinction
between what is pleasant by nature and what is not so.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: And Aristotle seems to imply here that most men are not truly engaged in
pleasurable activities, because their activities are not pleasant by nature.
LS: Yes. That seems to be the case.
Same Student: Now the question is: how does one know what is pleasant by nature?
That is to say, there are certain things that seem clearly natural in their pleasantness, but
which are the cause of all sorts of disruption in that they’re not properly engaged upon.
LS: Aristotle has devoted a considerable part of the Ethics to pleasure: the end of book 7
and the first part of book 10. Here he only is leading up to a proposition which saves
perfectly his previous definition of happiness, namely, the coincidence of these three
considerations: the good, the noble, and the pleasant. And now this would be not a nice
thing to do, if Aristotle said: Well, now the problem of happiness is solved. But he goes
on for four or five pages in taking up the same question again, because what he seems to
have solved in the form of the question of the relation of the noble and the pleasant
comes back in the form of the question of the relation of the intrinsically virtuous actions
and the extrinsic conditions of virtuous action, the equipment. So in other words—
Student: That carries the discussion to a slightly different place, one that’s more
amenable to—
LS: Why is it more amenable?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

97

Same Student: Well, if one considered the pleasant simply—I mean it’s true [that] a
certain amount of equipment is required to engage in pleasant activities, but it’s not clear
that that equipment is synonymous [with], or as extensive as the equipment necessary for
virtuous activity. It seems to me that it’s easier for a man to indulge himself in terms of
equipment than it is for him to be virtuous in terms of equipment.
LS: Yes, but is the same not true if we take the ordinary understanding of pleasure? Is it
not easier to enjoy pleasures indiscriminately than to make an effort in the highest
direction? Is that not true?
Same Student: Well, that’s true too. But once we grant him equipment necessary for
virtue, at that point we assume that the pleasure inherent in virtuous activity is higher or
better ordered according to the nature of the soul.
LS: Ya. But still, does it not detract from the self-sufficiency of happiness, if happiness
depends on something outside of happiness proper? Be that as it may, let us see whether
Aristotle has answered your difficulty when we have arrived at the end of the discussion
of happiness. Now will you go on? Read the last sentence of the preceding section again;
otherwise we will not understand the transition.
Reader:
and this is why some people identify it with good fortune (though some identify it with
virtue).
LS: “It,” namely, happiness. Yes?
Reader:
It is this that gives rise to the question whether it is a thing that can be learnt, or acquired
by training, or cultivated in some other manner, or whether it is bestowed by some divine
dispensation or even by fortune.
LS: “Fortune” is the same as “chance.”
Reader:
Now if anything that men have is a gift of the gods, it is reasonable to suppose that
happiness is divinely given—indeed of all man’s possessions it is most likely to be so,
inasmuch as it is the best of them all. (1099b7-13)
LS: Now Aristotle raises the question regarding happiness in the most radical form.
Happiness is the highest human good, but is it not so high—because it is so high, can it
be in any way of human origin? Is it not more reasonable to say it has been given by the
gods? Or perhaps it is merely by chance, a thought which occurred to us in a different
context a short while ago. Yes?
Reader:
This subject however may perhaps more properly belong to another branch of study.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

98

LS: So in other words, the question belongs to another consideration. What consideration
would this be?
Student: Theology.
LS: Yes. We see here again that Aristotle presupposes that ethics must not be based on
either physics or metaphysics. Yet that is important. But still, is the question which he
had just raised not of the greatest relevance for ethics: how do we become happy?
Therefore—now go on.
Reader:
Still, even if happiness is not sent us from heaven, but is won by virtue and by some kind
of study or practice, it seems to be one of the most divine things that exist. For the prize
and end of goodness must clearly be supremely good—it must be something divine and
blissful.
LS: Yes. Happiness belongs, at any rate, regardless of whether it is sent by the gods or
not, to the most divine things, for even if it is a consequence of human actions, it differs
essentially from these actions because it is the prize given for them and not the actions
themselves. “Divine” does not necessarily mean merely caused by the gods; it may also
mean resembling god or the divine. And this quality happiness has in contradistinction to
the virtuous actions. Yes?
Reader:
And also on our view it will admit of being widely diffused, since it can be attained
through some process of study or effort by all persons whose capacity for virtue has not
been stunted or maimed. (1099b13-20)
LS: Meaning if virtue has its root in man and not in a divine gift or happiness, then all
men in principle can become happy. Some exceptions are to be made: some men are by
nature truncated (say, moronic men), and they can therefore not become happy. If it were
not accessible to most men or to all normal men, it could be a privilege of the few elect,
elected by the gods. That is the alternative. But even if it is [accessible to all men], not all
men literally speaking can acquire it, because some are by nature truncated. Yes?
Student: Are there no differences among . . . normal men? Are not some normal men
more men than others? Therefore, can all normal men be happy in the same way?
LS: Ya, that is a long question. According to what Aristotle says here, rather at the
beginning of the work, happiness and virtue [are] open to all men who are not by nature
truncated, because virtue is the perfection of the nature of man. All men—I mean, that is
metaphoric language when we say that some men are more truly men than others. We had
a passage where Aristotle referred to that, or when he criticized Plato’s idea of the good.
All men are equally human beings, just as all dogs are equally dogs, [and] all cats are

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

99

equally cats, but some maybe have a greater disposition toward virtue than others. That’s
what you mean.
Same Student: Well, not really. Even a little bit more than that. Some men are not only
more disposed to be virtuous but are also stronger, more intelligent, more beautiful—
LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: They more truly approach—
LS: Well, they have a greater prospect to be good men, and even good men in the highest
sense. Aristotle does not deny [this]. To that extent, the utterance here is somewhat
misleading.
Same Student: But the question that that leads to is: can all men be happy in the same
way? Can all normal men be happy in the same way?
LS: Well, in one sense the question is correct, because there are two levels of happiness,
generally speaking: the level of moral virtue and the level of contemplative virtue. But
apart from that, some men reach either of these levels or both levels more perfectly than
others. There are not different kinds of happiness apart from these two kinds.
Same Student: One last small question. How would you differentiate what Aristotle says
in the following sentence from Leibniz’s idea that this is the best of all possible worlds?
LS: I believe Aristotle would have agreed with that. Leibniz was indeed the first, as far I
know, who made the assertion that this world is the best of all possible worlds. By the
way, from Leibniz’s assertion comes the expression “optimism.” Optimism is originally
the view of Leibniz: that the world is the best of all possible worlds. Aristotle never said
it, but I think it is always implied.
Same Student: Did he mean it in the same way?
LS: Ya. Well, in Leibniz there are many implications and polemical considerations which
are absent from Aristotle. For instance, Leibniz is compelled to show that even original
sin and eternal damnation, things which for Aristotle didn’t exist, do not do away with
the bestness of the world. One of Leibniz’s arguments is that, after all, the original sin
took place on the earth, and the earth is a very infinitesimal part of the universe and so
these defects of life on earth may even contribute to the overall beauty of the universe
because it is only such a small part. To repeat, Aristotle doesn’t say the world is the best
possible world, but I think he would have agreed with that if Leibniz had asked him. But
the question would never arise for Aristotle for the following reason: Leibniz asserts that
the world is the best possible world because he assumes that the world has been created
by God. And then the question arises: why did God create the world as it is and not in any
other way? And then Leibniz’s answer is: he preferred this world to all other possible

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

100

worlds because it is the best possible world. Now for Aristotle the question doesn’t arise
because there is no creation. This is probably the simplest reason. Good.
Now Aristotle, you have seen here, makes a distinction between learning and diligence,
as we can say, diligence or training. He leaves this open at this time, how far learning on
the one hand and practice on the other goes into the coming-into-being of virtue or
happiness. Now shall we go on here?
Reader:
Again, if it is better to be happy as a result of one’s own exertions than by the gift of
chance,x it is reasonable to suppose that this is how happiness is won; if things according
to nature have a natural tendency to be ordered in the noblest way,xi and the same is true
of the products of art, and of causation of any kind, and especially the highest. Whereas
that the greatest and noblest things should be left to fortune would be too contrary to the
fitness of things. (1099b20-25)
LS: Ya, too . . . So happiness cannot come to men by chance given the high rank of
happiness and the low rank of chance. What we get by chance proper are only external
goods, and not the most important ones. I repeat again, the clearest example of chance
given by Aristotle is: you dig in your garden and you find a treasure. There is no
connection. If happiness came through chance, it would not have any connection with
virtue. Differently stated, chance is disorderly, random. Nature and art are orderly, and
happiness and virtue have more to do with nature and art than with chance.
In this passage which we just read, you find the Aristotelian equivalent of the best of all
possible worlds. The world may have all kinds of defects, but it is not so stupidly
contrived as some people seem to think. That is the least one would have to say that
Aristotle conveys here. Yes, it is most beautiful.
Student: Is this just asserted here? Or does he take up this question in other works?
LS: In the Metaphysics he takes it up in a way; also in the Physics. In the Physics, book
2, he has a discussion of the alternative view, namely, atomism:xii the world has come
into being out of the aimless and meaningless meetings of atoms. And for Aristotle this
means that the world is a product of chance, and Aristotle tries to show that it is
impossible that a whole can be of a chance character. By chance event we mean always
an event occurring within a whole which does not have [a] chance character. So chance
presupposes a non-chancy world, and that is the point which he makes there in book 2.
Yes, now?
Reader:

x

In Rackham’s translation: “fortune.”
In Rackham’s translation: “inasmuch as in the world of nature things have a natural tendency to
be ordered in the best possible way.”
xii
See the discussion of chance in Aristotle, Physics 195b30-200b8.
xi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

101

Light is also thrown on the question by our definition of happiness, which said that it is a
certain kind of activity of the soul according to virtue;xiii whereas the remaining good
things are either merely indispensable conditions of happiness, or are of the nature of
auxiliary means, and useful instrumentally.
LS: That happiness does not come by chance follows directly from the logos, as Aristotle
calls it, and what he translates [as] “from the definition of happiness.” But this is [in] the
preceding chapter. And the reason is this: the soul, of which a certain kind of activity, a
kind of being-at-work, is happiness—the soul is by nature, and therewith the possibility
of the virtue of the soul. Every natural being has the possibility of being perfect in its way
or imperfect. The actualization of this possibility, perfection, must follow that possibility,
must be adapted to that possibility. Furthermore, the other good things without which
there cannot be happiness are in a nonarbitrary relation to happiness. That we need
external goods, say, some wealth, health and so on: this is not a matter of chance. You
cannot replace these by other good things which are not suitable as conditions of
happiness. So there is here order, intelligible order, and not chance. They do depend on
chance to some extent, but they are not the core of happiness. That is the point which
Aristotle will repeat time and again. Yes?
Reader:
This conclusion moreover agrees with what we laid down at the outset; for we stated that
the Supreme Good was the end of political science, but the principal care of this science
is to produce a certain character in the citizens, namely to make them good,xiv and
capable of performing noble actions.
LS: Ya, “doers of noble deeds.” The view that happiness does not come through chance
is confirmed also by the fact that happiness, the highest end, belongs to an art, namely,
the political art. And art and chance are mutually exclusive. And here, in passing,
Aristotle makes this remark which he will repeat in a modified manner shortly thereafter.
What is politics about? A contemporary political scientist has said: who gets what,
when.xv Aristotle has a somewhat different view: politics is concerned with making the
citizens men of a certain kind, a certain quality, namely, good and doers of noble deeds.
And we all have to make up our minds sooner or later whether we will side with Aristotle
or with Lasswell, in this as well as in some other matters. Yes?
Reader:
We have good reasons therefore for not speaking of an ox or horse or any other animal as
being happy, because none of these is able to participate in noble activities. (1099b25-a1)
LS: Well, “in being-at-work of this kind.” He refers to what he had said in the definition.
Yes?

xiii

The phrase “according to virtue” is supplied by the reader.
In Rackham’s translation: “virtuous.”
xv
Harold D. Lasswell, Politics: Who Gets What, When, How (New York: Whittlesey House,
1936).
xiv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

102

Reader:
For this cause also children cannot be happy, for they are not old enough to be capable of
noble acts; when children are spoken of as happy, it is in compliment to their promise for
the future. Happiness, as we said, requires both complete goodness and a complete
lifetime. For many reverses and vicissitudes of all sorts occur in the course of life, and it
is possible that the most prosperous man may encounter great disasters in his declining
years, as the story is told of Priam in the epics; but no one calls the man happy who meets
with such misfortunexvi and comes to a miserable end. (1100a1-9)
LS: Here Aristotle comes up again with a difficulty regarding happiness. Let us assume
that Priam was an excellent human being. And then through the fault of his
good-for-nothing son Paris, Troy is eventually destroyed, and Priam is killed, and he
knows that his wife and all his sons will be killed, and all his daughters will be sold into
slavery. Now is this not obviously misery? Surely no one could call this excellent man in
this condition a happy man. So happiness seems to depend very much—happiness seems
to become endangered by misfortunes of a certain size. One must be an adult human
being in order to be happy. One can state what Aristotle means also as follows: if any
being could be happy by divine allotment, a horse could be made happy. In other words,
there would be a completely topsy-turvy world. Happiness depends undoubtedly on
external goods. No one would call Priam happy. Yes?
Student: I suppose that—well, couldn’t one argue that if Priam had been the most
excellent of men, he would not have been a king in the first place and therefore would not
have been subject to the kind of unhappinesses that he [did suffer]. This may sound silly,
but juxtapose it, for example, to the case of Socrates. Now supposing Xanthippe had
been—oh, I don’t know, taken off and sold into slavery [laughter] and leaving aside for
the moment things which amuse us about Xanthippe, but at any rate, Xanthippe is sold
into slavery. Now this would have been a misfortune for Socrates, but at the same time it
would not have borne directly on his happiness or unhappiness as an excellent man.
LS: Well, the fact that when you read the stories about Xanthippe, you regard her as an
old battleaxe [laughter], that does not prove that Socrates did not love her. The ancients
were rather delicate in these matters, and we don’t know. She must have had some
qualities, otherwise Socrates would not have married her. And the quality cannot have
been wealth [laughter], that is also clear, so she must have had what they call personal
qualities. But still—incidentally, why do you say that [the life of an unhappy] king is
more bearable than the life of somebody else?
Same Student: I didn’t mean to say that the misery of the king is more bearable than the
misery of Socrates. It’s just the other way around: the king, just by nature of his being a
king, is more concerned, I suppose, with what you would call tertiary objects than is
Socrates, or a philosopher, or Aristotle for that matter.
LS: The king is more exposed to the vicissitudes.
xvi

In Rackham’s translation: “misfortunes like Priam’s.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

103

Same Student: And what is more, his focus is, well, at a lower level.
LS: Yes, but still, I believe you take the fate of Priam too lightly. And Aristotle finds, I
think, a somewhat more subtle solution in the sequel. Let me now add only one point.
This peak, as it were, when he quotes this epigram and asserts that there is a perfect
coincidence of the best, the noblest, and the most pleasant: there is a perfect harmony.
And this is easily called today optimism in a slightly different sense; Aristotle had too
sanguine a view of the human condition. Now this you must not believe for one moment.
I read to you only one passage. That is at the beginning of book 2 of the Metaphysics:
“The investigation of the truth is in one way hard, in another easy. An indication of this is
found in the fact that no one is able to attain the truth adequately . . . The difficulties are
of two kinds. The cause of the present difficulty is not in the facts but in us. For as the
eyes of bats are to the blaze of day, so is the reason in our soul to the things which are by
nature most evident of all.”xvii
This is the human condition. Man’s highest happiness consists in knowing the truth. But
we are by nature as able to see the truth as the eyes of bats are fit to see the blaze of the
day. So there cannot be any question of Aristotle having been unduly sanguine regarding
the human condition. Yes. Now Aristotle begins the solution of the problem in the next
chapter. Yes?
Student: Is whether or not something is a misfortune determined by the man to whom
the misfortune occurs, or does Aristotle say that there are certain things which are always
misfortunes?
LS: That is not a matter of mere whim. Otherwise, a man who has lost an envelope on
which he made a few notes of no importance whatever might become very disturbed. I
have seen such people: unhappy. Well, but only he himself would regard himself as
unhappy. No, but the things which Aristotle mentions: loss of children, loss of friends,
loss of good reputation, loss of all all means of support. These are terrible things. Think
of one well-known example, if Priam doesn’t mean so much to you: think of Job. The
fate of Job is an epitome of misery. And this is not arbitrary; I mean, all human beings,
except perhaps some inmates of lunatic asylums, would agree that this is great misery: all
the children died, all his fortune lost, and sick in body. Yes?
Same Student: But could not a truly good man, a truly virtuous man, not be sorrowful at
perhaps the loss of his reputation?
LS: Sure, that is true. You are on the right way. Aristotle will say it in his way, and I
think he remains a bit closer to what one can expect of normal human beings. I mean, of
course some wise men, the Stoics especially, have said that these are no goods at all,
these external goods, and one can be happy under torture, and some things of this kind.
But this will not impress much the large majority of men because they are understandably
xvii

Metaphysics 993a30-b1, 7-11. Strauss reads from Metaphysica in The Works of Aristotle, ed.
and trans. W. D. Ross (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1908), vol. 8.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

104

more attached to their children, to their friends, to their means of support, [and] to their
reputation than these extreme sages are, and Aristotle wishes not to make extreme
demands on them. Now let us then continue where we left off.
Reader:
for it is believed that also some evil and also some good can befall the dead, just as much
as they can happen to the living without their being aware of it—for instance honours,
and disgraces, and the prosperity and misfortunes of their children and their descendants
in general.
LS: We will stop here. The difficulty regarding happiness comes out most clearly in the
saying of Solon, the Athenian legislator, that no one is to be praised [as] happy before his
death. As long as we live, our happiness is in danger. Now this saying is not quite clear,
and therefore Aristotle mentions this ambiguity. It could mean, “Can only the dead can be
called happy?” And this Aristotle rejects, on the grounds that we understand by happiness
activity, being-at-work, which is not possible for the dead. But Solon doesn’t mean that
only the dead can be happy: he means that only the dead are no longer exposed to the
vicissitudes of fortune. Yet, nevertheless, these vicissitudes still affect them, even if they
are not aware of them. And Aristotle explains this by an example taken from the living.
For example, a living man may lose his children without knowing it. But everyone who
knows of the loss of his children will say he is a man in misery, although he still believes
[himself] to have the children and believes [himself] to be happy. Therefore the
consciousness of happiness or unhappiness is not the sole consideration [for] why we call
men happy or unhappy. Now how does he go on?
Reader:
But here too there is a difficulty. For suppose a man to have lived in perfect happiness
until old age, and to have come to a correspondingly happy end: he may still have many
vicissitudes befall his descendants, some of whom may be good and meet with the
fortune which they deserve, and others the opposite; and moreover these descendants
may clearly stand in every possible degree of remoteness from the ancestors in question.
LS: In other words, grand-grandchildren, grand-grand-grandchildren, and so on. Yes?
Reader:
Now it would be a strange thing if the dead man also were to change with the fortunes of
his family, and were to become a happy man at one time and then miserable at another;
yet on the other hand it would also be strange if ancestors were not affected at all, even
over a limited period, by the fortunes of their descendants. (1100a18-30)
LS: Yes. Well, the difficulty is this, then: either the happy man is like a chameleon and
his happiness changes into unhappiness and vice versa all the time, or the dead man is
thought to be altogether indifferent to the fate of his children and other descendants. Both
alternatives are unbearable, and therefore he returns to the earlier difficulty. He will soon
find the solution. Do you see the point? It will become clearer from what he says, and
therefore I suggest we read a bit [further] in this section. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

105

Reader:
But let us go back to our former difficulty, for perhaps it will throw light on the
question we are now examining. If we are to look to the end, and congratulate a man
when dead not as actually being blessed, but because he has been blessed in the past,
surely it is strange that the actual time when a man is happy that fact cannot be truly
predicated of him, because we are unwilling to call the living happy owing to the
vicissitudes of fortune, and owing to our conception of happiness as something
permanent and not readily subject to change, whereas the wheel of fortune often turns
full circle in the same person’s experience. For it is clear that if we are to be guided by
fortune, we shall often have to call the same man first happy and then miserable; we
shall make out the happy man to be a sort of ‘chameleon or a house built on the sand.’
But perhaps it is quite wrong to be guided in our judgement by the changes of fortune,
since true prosperity and adversity do not depend on fortune’s favours, although, as we
said, our life does require these in addition; but it is the active exercise of our faculties
in conformity with virtue that causes happiness, and the opposite activities its opposite.
And the difficulty just discussed is a further confirmation of our definition; since none
of man’s functions possess the quality of permanence so fully as the activities in
conformity with virtue: they appear to be more lasting even than our knowledge of
particular sciences. And among these activities themselves those which are the highest
in the scale of values are the more lasting, because they most fully and continuously
occupy the lives of the supremely happy: for this appears to be the reason why we do
not forget them.
The happy man therefore will possess the element of stability in question, and will
remain happy all his life; since he will be always or at least most often employed in
doing and contemplating the things according to virtue.xviii And he will bear changes of
fortune most nobly, and with perfect propriety in every way, being as he is ‘good in
very truth’ and ‘four-square without reproach.’ (1100a31-b22)
LS: Let us stop here. So what Aristotle asserts then here, that is the line of the argument
from now on. Happiness consists not merely in virtuous activity but also in the
equipment, as he calls it. But the core of happiness is virtuous action, not the things
dependent on chance. He contrasts here the instability of fortune and misfortune with the
stability of virtue. So it cannot easily be removed. On the contrary, the misfortunes do not
necessarily endanger happiness, for they give opportunities for acting nobly. And
therefore the case of virtue is safe. What did you want to say?
Student: I’m just curious. Isn’t this a rather strange discretion for Aristotle to be
undertaking, since, if I remember correctly, in the other writings he doesn’t even consider
the possibility, or he doesn’t consider it very likely that there is an afterlife or something
after death?
xviii

In Rackham’s translation: “in conformity with virtue.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

106

LS: Yes, well, this is not a theoretical book. This is not the book On the Soul (De Anima),
or what have you. But this is a book addressed to gentlemen, not theoretical men, and
these gentlemen, to say the least, do not know whether there will not be a life after death.
You have a good example of that at the beginning of Plato’s Republic: old Cephalus. You
remember him? His worry is that he doesn’t know: will there not be punishments after
death? And Socrates does not try to tell him that there are no such things. Aristotle leaves
this question here open, and he gives a reason for it a little bit later, namely, for a simple
human being—and I think we all are in some way simple human beings—the thought that
someone to whom we were dear in his life will no longer in any way whatsoever be
concerned with us [is unbearable]. Think of a child of fourteen who loses his mother. The
thought is unthinkable that where there should have been the utmost concern, there will
be complete indifference. Is it not more philanthropic, more humane to assume that this
concern will continue beyond the death of the departed human being? In this way,
Aristotle enters into this way of thinking. In this spirit, he enters into this way of thinking,
without going into the—then he would have to open up the terrific theoretical issues:
think of the demonstrations of the immortality of the soul given by Plato. What kind of an
argument would this be? It’s wholly unfit for the Ethics.
Same Student: Couldn’t he just not talk about it at all, though, as another alternative, I
mean rather than . . .
LS: Yes, but the question came up very naturally because there is a question of
happiness. Happiness seems to be very frail, and this frailness was recognized by Solon
in his saying, “No one can be praised happy while he is alive.” And therefore the whole
question of happiness, of how happiness is affected by what happens to a man’s nearest
and dearest after his death comes up quite naturally. Aristotle moves on a variety of
levels, and he leads us up from one level to another. We are still at the beginning. Yes?
Reader:
But the accidents of fortune are many and vary in degree of magnitude; and although
small pieces of good luck, as also of misfortune, clearly do not change the whole course
of life, yet great and repeated successes will render life more blissful, since both of their
own nature they help to embellish it, and also they can be nobly and virtuously utilized;
while great and frequent reverses can crush and mar bliss, for they cause pain and they
hinder many activities.xix Yet nevertheless even in adversity nobility shines through,
when a man endures repeated and severe misfortune with patience, not owing to the
insensibility but from nobilityxx and greatness of soul. And if, as we said, a man’s life is
determined by his activities, none of the blessedxxi can ever become miserable. For he
will never do hateful or base actions, since we hold that the truly good and wise man will
bear all kinds of fortune in a seemly way, and will always act in the noblest manner that
the circumstances allow; even as a good general makes the most effective use of the

xix

In Rackham’s translation: “mar our bliss both by the pain they cause and by the hindrance
they offer to many activities.”
xx
In Rackham’s translation: “generosity.”
xxi
In Rackham’s translation: “no supremely happy man.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

107

forces at his disposal, and a good shoemaker makes the finest shoe possible out of the
leather supplied him—
LS: So in other words, if the general has a very poor army and there is no time for
training them properly, yet his excellence will show in the use he makes of this very poor
army. The same is true of the shoemaker who has very poor material for making shoes.
And now Aristotle applies this to the virtuous man: if he is haunted by all kinds of
misery, he can’t make a big show, great show. But he can nevertheless, with this very
poor material at his disposal, lead a life much more noble than that of another man who
has the same kind of misfortune and lacks nobility, and even the man lacking nobility
who has great good fortune. Yes?
Reader:
And this being so, the happy man can never become miserable; though it is true he will
not be supremely blessed if he encounters the misfortunes of a Priam. Nor yet assuredly
will he be variable and liable to change; for he will not be dislodged from his happiness
easily, nor by ordinary misfortunes, but only by severe and frequent disasters, nor will he
recover from such disasters and become happy again quickly, but only, if at all, after a
long term of years, in which he has had time to compass great and noble things. xxii
(1100b22-1101a13)
LS: So in other words, one presents the matter somewhat rhetorically. If you have a
noble character like Priam or Job, he may be stricken with all kinds of misfortune, [but]
he will never be a contemptible wretch. He will never be a wretch, Aristotle says. You
cannot say he is happy if he is stricken this way. Here you have a beautiful example,
incidentally, of the inexactness of Aristotle’s Ethics. How to draw the line here? And yet
in a given case, men of judgment, who have to be men of experience, will draw the line
properly when confronted with this particular case and say: This is a man who is happy or
who is not a contemptible wretch, and another man who isn’t. Mr. Shulsky?
Mr. Shulsky: The analogy to the arts, the general who has a bad army or the shoemaker
who has bad leather, would suggest that as soon as the virtuous man did have the proper
materials—in other words, as soon as his luck changed, he would then be able to live the
same life that he did before.
LS: Yes.
Mr. Shulsky: But Aristotle says that the recovery would be slow. And it would seem that
the recovery would be immediate if he still had the virtue within him and—
LS: No, but the sufferings. Aristotle thinks of the sufferings. How long will it take until
the wounds have healed? But for the other side of the matter, if we think only of loss of
wealth: the virtuous man who has lost all his wealth cannot be munificent after having
lost his wealth. But after he has recovered it, he will be munificent again. Now Aristotle
xxii

In Rackham’s translation: “to compass high distinctions and achievements.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

108

would say [that] if he is a virtuous man, he will not regain his wealth in a very short time,
because then—pardon?
Mr. Shulsky: Well, that depends. I mean, maybe he is a just man who . . .
LS: Well, the classics were rather distrustful, and as Plato puts it, somewhere he says if
you use only just means for getting rich, and another man uses both just and unjust
means, the latter will become twice as rich and twice as fast rich [laughter] as the former.
Mr. Shulsky: I was wondering if that statement didn’t somehow imply that the bad
fortune that this man has suffered eventually will affect him in terms of his virtuous
activity as well. In other words, that being a poor man, he may get out of the habit of
extreme justice because of the needs of the situation, but once he is then comfortable
again, he may still have a turn of mind that leads him to the certain sorts of cunning that
he wouldn’t have practiced before—certain sorts of cunning with respect to money that
wouldn’t have exactly . . .
LS: No, I believe Aristotle has in mind the long healing of the wounds. Think of the loss
of children, and of good children, that this would [lead to] a certain depression or sadness
which disables [one from doing]1 as many noble deeds as he otherwise could. I think
otherwise it doesn’t make sense. Mr. . . .
Student: In the case of a general, or some other man who is responsible for other men,
let us say he’s in a situation where he can act nobly and surrender his forces in the case of
a defeat, or by means of fraud or some other relatively ignoble activity—
LS: Fraud in war is not ignoble. [Laughter].
Same Student: Well, if, as a gentleman, he goes over to the other commander and says,
“I give you my word as a gentleman that we will not escape,” and then proceeds to do so,
it is clear that he is not a gentleman. He may be a good general.
LS: That is really a question. That has been discussed by the ancient casuists: whether in
order to win a battle—say, in a just war—such things [as] white lies, perhaps even
including the word of a gentleman (I have never heard that) are not permissible and
compatible with being a gentleman.
Same Student: But how would—I mean, Aristotle it would seem, would answer back—
LS: Well, Aristotle was blissfully unaware of all feudal notions of points of honor, and
therefore there was no—
Same Student: The Greeks had, I mean—
LS: No. They did not have the feudal notions. That was observed very nicely by some
modern commentators, and more than commentators: that when there was the Council of

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

109

War during the Persian Wars, Themistocles had one proposal regarding the naval battle,
and the Spartan commander—I forgot his name; Eurybiades?—had another notion, and
the Spartan became very angry and used his whip to whip Themistocles. And
Themistocles said, “Whip me, but listen to me”: pataxon men, akoue de.xxiii And these
modern commentators observed that this is wholly unthinkable in modern times, where
there would be a duel first. You know? This point d’honneur simply didn’t exist and
wouldn’t affect the situation. Nor for Aristotle, of course.
Same Student: But that seems to imply, I mean—
LS: Therefore, also “on the word of a gentleman” wouldn’t mean more than “on my
word” [LS chuckles].
Same Student: That seems to imply though, I mean, that the resolution of being a
gentleman—that as a private man on the one hand and being a public man on the other—
is made here in two different directions. For Aristotle, the public man has a certain kind
of supremacy with respect to virtue in that he can do things that otherwise a private man
would not do, whereas the more feudal notion would have it the other way around: the
private is in a certain sense superior to the public.
LS: I don’t know that that is—
Same Student: That may not be the best formula, but there may be a difference here.
LS: Yes, I see it. At any rate, I do not see your difficulty. In other words, general who
lies or cheats in order to win a battle in a just war is not blameworthy. I mean, there was
never any quarrel on the part of men like Aristotle about that.
Same Student: But in a certain sense, he’s not simply blameless.
LS: Oh yes, he is. If inexperienced people think he’s a liar, then they have to grow up
and learn that this is not a lie, at least in the sense of a blameworthy action. Yes?
Student: Sir, I’d like to ask another question about Priam. You made the point a minute
ago that this was a perfect example of Aristotle’s ambiguity: that it was possible to not be
happy, but at the same time not to be a wretch either. So we have King Priam, who is not
happy but he is not a wretch either, which is a sort of a way of stating that he is happy
without knowing it, although happiness not—
LS: No, no. He is not happy, because he has suffered these terrible misfortunes. Think
only of what happened to Hector. So he is not happy. And it would be somehow an insult
to common sense to say Priam is happy, as the Stoics would have said. Now the Stoics
were extremists whom one cannot trust in these matters. [Laughter] But on the other
hand, to say he is a contemptible wretch—I add the adjective to make it somewhat more
xxiii

See Plutarch, Lives, “Themistocles.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 7

110

forceful—is absurd, seeing the nobility and the seemliness which he observed even in
these terrible situations.
Same Student: Yes, but we’re talking about nobility, and the virtue that is displayed as
being a concomitant of happiness, or the one being a concomitant of the other. Maybe all
I wanted to get was perhaps an expansion of the kind of happiness as Solon understood it
to maybe another kind of happiness the way Aristotle is taking it to be, I—
LS: I think what Aristotle understands by happiness is not far-fetched. The trouble is
only that precisely because he remains loyal to the ordinary understanding of happiness
he gets into these conceptual difficulties. Our ordinary concept of happiness is exposed to
these difficulties. I mean, on the one hand, it makes sense to say—we are compelled to
say—that the core of happiness is virtuous activity. We cannot envy, as sensible men, an
absolutely abominable, vicious fellow who has external fortune. That goes without
saying. But if we see now this virtuous man, perhaps because of his very virtue—think of
Glaucon’s argument—exposed to all kinds of misery, including torture and what have
you: well, what shall we say in that case? Do we cease to respect him deeply for this
reason, because he has come into this misfortune? No. But on the other hand, we cannot
say that he is as happy as he was before. And I think Aristotle has provided for this state
of affairs by his general remarks about the lack of exactness in this study. There is no
simple formula possible. Happiness equal to doing of noble deeds or [the] exercise of
virtue: that is true; but, but, but. Nothing we can do changes this, because they are not
brought in due to a mistake in Aristotle’s reasoning but this is the character of human life.
And where is it written that human life should be susceptible of being formulated in a
simple formula? That is the hope of some of our more naïve fellow human beings, but it
has not any ground in facts.
I think we have to leave it here. We will, if possible, finish the reading of the first book
next time. I remember there were two of you who promised (although not on the word of
the gentleman) that they would hand in their papers today. Oh, here’s one. And you have
the other? You have it also? Very good. Fine.
1

Changed from “to do.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

111

Session 8: March 6, 1968i
Leo Strauss: First I would say a few words about the two papers I received last time.
First, Mr. Allen, a few points: “Closely related to this is the relationship of virtue and
vice,” [which you call] “nonvirtue,” with a question mark. Mr. Allen, why did you
hesitate to speak of vice and call it only “nonvirtue”?
Student: . . . I think that . . . is that that seems to be only two things: positive virtue and
two vices, hence virtue and one vice . . . in that sense . . .
LS: But still there would be vice, because nonvirtue—for example, a stone also has
nonvirtue. That wouldn’t—you should not hesitate. Yes, you said rightly that “being just
depends not on doing just acts, but on doing just acts as the just man would do them,” but
you did not explain what this means. What does it mean?
Same Student: What it means is that being just, as a state of character, implies that one
has acquired the manner of being just. Not that one simply does a just act in a particular
situation, or that a man who accidentally does a just act is not necessarily a just man,
which is like the analogy he uses with the grammarian: to accidentally do something
grammatically properly does not make one a grammarian, but to do it in the manner that a
grammarian would do it—
LS: But now how is this in the case of the just man? In other words, someone who speaks
correct English is not necessarily a good grammarian, or for that matter any grammarian.
But how does it apply in the case of the just man?
Same Student: Well, it applies in the case of the just man because it further substantiates
the argument that when you become just through habituation, which is to say you acquire
a manner of being just rather than simply by doing an occasional just act here and there.
LS: Though even if a man does always just acts—
Same Student: Well, even if he does always just acts, and if he always does just acts
without knowing that he’s doing just acts, or if in all cases it was always accidental, that
does not make him a just man.
LS: Yes, but more simply, if he does the just acts for the sake of their justice, then he is a
just man. But if he does it out of fear of punishment, he is not a just man. Good. All right.
And there are certain vaguenesses also, which you will see on page 5. Will you pass on
this to Mr. Allen?
i

Strauss begins by discussing writing assignments on book 1 of the text. These remarks have
been omitted.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

112

Mr. Forster, [your] paper, also a few points. “A somewhat paradoxical situation results:
the legislator exists for the sake of the good, but the good exists for the sake of the
legislator.” Can you explain that?
Student: Well, I had a hunch you’d pick me up on that. [Laughter]
LS: Well, that is not a very polite expression. No, no no. I did not mean it as a reprimand.
I only try to check on my knowledge of English.
Same Student: I tried to clarify that a little further on when I stated that the legislative
function as it appears in that last chapter—well, as it appears throughout the work that I
read so far—is of a largely mechanical nature, so that the function of the legislator is to
legislate. That is his . . . He keeps in mind the just object or the object of justice.
Nonetheless, his immediate attention is to the business of legislating, and he receives his
guidance from the teachings or instructions of political science, which in turn is informed
by philosophers. But the point is that his life is the legislative life, and to that end, you
might say the good serves as a mean, so that in a sense his legislative life is a function of,
you might say, the good. The good exists for the sake of his legislating, which is not to
deny however that he keeps in mind the good as, you might say, a final end. I didn’t
make that clear.
LS: No, you did not. I mean, I would say that’s wrong, what you said. There is one more
point—no, that’s all. And now let us turn to where we left off. Aristotle is discussing here
in the chapter we are now reading the saying of Solon: that no one can be praised happy
before his end, before his death. And this is a consequence of the fact that the relation
between happiness and excellent human activity is not clear. The core of happiness is
excellent human activity, but happiness requires in addition something else, what
Aristotle calls equipment. Or to take another case which is not immediately related,
equipment are things which are required for doing excellent things; for example, you
must be in a reasonable state of health of body and mind to do excellent actions. But you
do not have to be very handsome in order to do that. Now why should extreme ugliness
prevent a man from becoming happy? That is not so clear. That is, non-ugliness doesn’t
seem to be a necessary condition, a necessary instrument for acting nobly, and yet it is so
according to Aristotle’s assertion.
So there is an excess of happiness beyond nobility of actions. Another illustration, and a
more simple illustration, is the fate of Priam or of Job, assumedly a man of excellent
character who suffers the greatest miseries which a human being can suffer. Is he still
happy in this miserable state? The mere fact that we call him miserable seems to show
that he cannot be happy. But Aristotle’s way out is [that] the core of happiness is nobility
of action, and he would presumably say that this man of extreme ugliness and
repulsiveness—the way in which he bears that and does not become resentful and is not
molded, as it were, in his whole being by this misfortune: that is a matter in which his
nobility of character can show.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

113

So that it remains: the core of happiness is nobility of action. Yes, but if one is
dissatisfied with it, Aristotle would probably say: Well, give me a better formula. The
Stoics, for example, had this formula: These other things don’t count. They are not even
good things, they are only preferable, as they called them, but they are not to be called
good in any strict sense. This led to the famous Stoic paradoxes, whereas Aristotle’s view
is precisely not paradoxical but sticks to what we all would ordinarily admit, and that is
not unimportant if we want to understand human things and human affairs.
Now I think we should continue at 1100a14: “What then does prevent us from holding
happy the man who acts according.” Should I find it for you? 1100a.
Reader:
What then prevents us from pronouncing that man happy who realizes complete goodness
in action, and is adequately furnished with external goods, not for any casual period but
throughout a complete lifetime in the same manner? Or should we add, that he must also
be destined to go on living in the same manner,ii and to die accordingly, because the
future is hidden from us, and we conceive happiness as an end, something utterly and
absolutely final and complete?
LS: In other words, if you take him only as he is now and do not consider his future fate,
and eventually his end, in the sense of his death and what happens in between, you take
too narrow a view of happiness. Yes?
Reader:
If this is so, we shall pronounce those of the living who possess and are destined to go on
possessing the good things we have specified to be supremely blessed, though on the
human scale of bliss.
So much for a discussion of these things. iii
LS: Yes. So that’s clear. We can call living men, men while they’re still alive, happy or
blessed, but with the qualification, “blessed as human beings can be blessed,” with this
big question mark: what will happen to them in the future? Which we do not yet know.
Yes?
Reader:
That the happiness of the dead is not influenced at all by the fortunes of their descendants
and their friends in general seems too heartless a doctrine, and contrary to accepted
beliefs. (1101a14-24)

ii

In Rackham’s translation: “May we not then confidently pronounce that man happy who
realizes complete goodness in action, and is adequately furnished with external goods? Or should
we add, that he must also be destined to go on living not for any casual period but throughout a
complete lifetime in the same manner”
iii
In Rackham’s translation: “a discussion of this question.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

114

LS: “To the opinions,” he says. To the opinions. The fate of the descendants and of the
friends must be considered important in judging the happiness of a man, even after the
man is already dead. The alternative would be “heartless,” as he translates.“Loveless”
would perhaps be a better translation. And in addition it runs counter to the opinions. The
opinions and the two reasons go together. The accepted opinions are inspired by the
opposite of lovelessness. Men’s desire for love, for being loved, for attachment, forms the
opinions which are generally accepted, and that is the rationale of them. You want to say
something?
Student: Yes, I just wanted to ask whether there is a textual reason for saying that that
sentence refers only to men who are already dead? It seems that it could refer to a man
who is alive, too, if you’re saying that about—
LS: Yes, that goes without saying. He had spoken before of Priam: these things happened
to his children during his lifetime. There is no explicit reference here. But when he says
the fates of the descendants, that refers to not only the children and grandchildren but also
beyond, say, great-grandchildren. Many people don’t see their own great-grandchildren,
and still there’s the next generation. I think he means that.
Reader:
But the accidents of life are many and diverse, and vary in the degree in which they affect
us. To distinguish between them in detail would clearly be a long and indeed endless
undertaking, and a general treatment in outline may perhaps be enough. Even our own
misfortunes, then, though in some cases they exercise considerable weight and influence
upon the course of our lives, in other cases seem comparatively unimportant; and the
same is true of the misfortunes of our friends of all degrees. Also it makes a great
difference whether those who are connected with any occurrences are alive or dead, much
more so than it does in a tragedy whether the crimes and horrors are supposed to have
taken place beforehand or are enacted on the stage. We ought therefore to take this
difference also into account, and still more perhaps the doubt that exists whether the dead
really participate in good or evil at all. For the above considerations seem to show that
even if any good or evil does penetrate to them, the effect is only small and trifling, either
intrinsically or in relation to them, or if not trifling, at all events not of such magnitude
and kind as to make the unhappy happy or to rob the happy of their blessedness.
It does then appear that the dead are influenced in some measure by the good fortune of
their friends, and likewise by their misfortunes, but that the effect is not of such a kind or
degree as to render the happy unhappy or vice versa. (1101a24-b9)
LS: Yes. That is a quite complicated statement. Now in two cases, in a35 and in b6,
Aristotle doesn’t use the ordinary word for the dead but a somewhat more solemn word,
kekmēkotes, derived from the Greek word kamnō, which means to be tired, to be ill; and
then also in the perfect, as here, to have become tired; and then finally the dead. I would
translate it by “[the] departed,” in order to indicate the reverential element which this
word here has.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

115

So Aristotle compares here the terrible things which happen to a man after death, i.e.,
which happen to his descendants and friends, and the terrible things which happen during
one’s lifetime to the difference between the terrible things which are merely told in the
prologue of a drama, a tragedy, and the things which happen on the stage. Now of course
we are more affected by what we see on the stage than by what, say, a messenger or
someone else tells in a prologue. And the dead, the departed, are less affected by the
misfortune of their descendants and of their friends than they would have been if they
were still alive. What Aristotle implies is [that] they are so far away [that] it is a kind of
weak rumor which reaches them and therefore cannot deeply affect them. They are
preoccupied with other things, and also it takes a kind of long time until the rumor
reaches them. And we know perhaps from our experience [that] if we hear of a friend
whom we have not seen for a very long time that he died some years ago, that is slightly
different than when we hear he died just now. So this is not simply superstition, what
Aristotle gives us here, but these are very human observations. So the main point is this:
one’s happiness is not seriously influenced by what happens to one’s nearest and dearest
after one’s death. It has a certain influence, but not very great. So whether Aristotle
believed that there is such a life after death in which one can become aware of the fate of
one’s nearest and dearest, that is hard to decide on the basis of this passage. But he only
says that’s enough for the present purpose. Granting that this is the case, we can disregard
it in our discussion of happiness.
Here we are then in a way at the end of the discussion of happiness, with one limitation,
and we will see that soon. We can say [that] every normal man of good family who is not
repulsively ugly, and of course not moronic, can become happy. That seems to be the net
result. There is a certain awkwardness in this result because, as we have seen on an
earlier occasion in 1099b18 to 20,1 the highest good must be available for all those who
are not truncated with regard to virtue and must be available to them through some
learning, or teaching and assiduity. Clearly a man truncated—quite a few people are not
truncated and yet are poor or lack other equipment so that they cannot be perfectly happy.
Now regarding the discussion of this chapter, I might refer to Thomas Aquinas’s
commentary, which shows here clearly the difference between Thomas and Aristotle.
Thomas argues on the basis of the principle accepted by Aristotle that a natural desire
cannot be vain, i.e., a natural desire must be fulfilled. And this leads Thomas, given the
fact that the natural desire for happiness is not fully fulfilled, not unqualifiedly fulfilled,
to the conclusion that our natural desire for happiness points to a bliss in another life. iv
That is surely not what Aristotle suggests. How would Aristotle argue against Thomas?
Student: He leaves out chance. Thomas does, I mean. Such an argument seems to
abstract from chance.
LS: Yes, but a natural desire is a desire which is fulfilled. You mean it is fulfilled
according to Aristotle in most cases, but not in all cases?

iv

Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §202.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

116

Same Student: It’s not fulfilled for someone who fulfils all requirements and yet doesn’t
achieve happiness . . . fortune.
LS: Ya. And Thomas would of course say there is no chance in this sense but providence,
and therefore that will be the difference. That’s one way of saving it.
Student: Would Aristotle say that man as a natural being is both . . . and body and that
there is a fitting happiness appropriate to man so he can’t be appropriately blessed . . . to
do with contemplation . . . that there is a fitting and adequate happiness . . .
LS: Yes, he would say that, but what is the principle implied? Aristotle would say no
natural desire is in vain, but a desire for what is intrinsically impossible is not natural but
proceeds from certain questionable opinions and is not a natural desire.
Same Student: . . . he thinks that to wish for immortality is an impossible or irrational
wish. Is it fair to say that the most perfect or blessed life . . . insofar as we participate in
that sort of life, we’re a god?
LS: Yes, that he seems to say. You want to say something?
Student: Doesn’t Aristotle assume that . . .
LS: Ya, but if you put it only this way, that he does in a way. He says blessed as human
beings. But this might lead to the view that there is another form of bliss.
Same Student: What I mean to say is, wouldn’t Aquinas reject . . . could be perfectly
happy . . .
LS: Yes sure, he would say that, but he would say nevertheless [that] it makes sense to
speak of the felicity of this life, and that’s the term which he uses all the time in his
commentary on the first book of the Ethics. It makes sense and is even necessary. Think
of practical questions: the greatest happiness of the greatest number is an expression
which makes some sense, doesn’t it? I mean, whether it is the soundest political principle
is another matter. But it makes some sense. Therefore we must make allowance for a
limited and qualified kind of happiness. That’s no difficulty. Yes?
Student: Aristotle would merely say: I’m not talking at all about any happiness other
than the happiness that can be achieved by man here and now. So I’m not talking about
the happiness of the dead.
LS: Ya, but he does. Does he not bring it up?
Same Student: Ah, but only insofar as it is connected with the happiness that they
achieved on earth. He’s very careful, so it appears, not to go beyond that, and not talking
about whether the dead are happy or how the dead are happy as dead men. The dead are

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

117

made more happy or less happy, a little bit, not by what happens to them in the afterlife
but what happens to their descendants on earth.
LS: Yes. Still, but how is their happiness affected by what happens to their descendants
on earth? So the happiness after death is being considered. And I think Aristotle could not
well avoid that. You said Aristotle is only concerned with the happiness which can be
achieved by human action, but Aristotle has shown that this happiness which can be
achieved by human action depends on so many things which man cannot himself procure
for himself.
Same Student: No question, but yet Thomas would do something entirely different. He
would say that the happiness of man after death depends not so much on what he did in
life—
LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: and what his ancestors did, but on what happens to him after he dies. On
what happens to him after he dies.
LS: Well, to some extent I believe it depends a bit on what he did in his life.
Same Student: Somewhat.
LS: Somewhat, not completely, because divine grace comes in. But still, let us assume
that he never repented [of] his evil deeds. Then it is a fair assumption that his life after
death will not be too happy.
Same Student: Yet isn’t there a difference, or perhaps this isn’t significant, between
Aristotle’s discussion of happiness and not only Thomas’s but also Plato’s. Plato
discusses what happens to a man in the afterlife in terms of what actually happens to him
in the afterlife, not in terms of what happens on earth and how he is affected by it.
Aristotle doesn’t appear to discuss the fate of the soul in the afterlife.
LS: No, no. But still, his discussion implies some thought about it, because if the dead
were absolutely dead, then the question couldn’t arise. But this view that the dead are
absolutely dead is a loveless view with a view to the nearest and dearest, because the
thought that someone who has been greatly concerned with you will now be completely
indifferent to your fate is hard to bear. It is a hard thought, a harsh thought, a loveless
thought. It may be the true thought, but this is not the only consideration in human
matters, whether it is true or not. Yes?
Student: I don’t understand exactly the argument that Mr. Wedergreen was making
about chance. It seems to me that the very fact that a natural desire for happiness can be
interrupted by such a thing as chance implies the conclusion that Aristotle—I mean, that
Aquinas makes. It’s not that Aquinas didn’t take into consideration chance, it doesn’t
seem to me, but rather that he rejects the possibility that natural desires could be, you

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

118

know, incomplete because of chance. I don’t understand why chance is a suitable
argument against Aquinas.
LS: Yes, if it is true what Aristotle says, that properly equipped and properly bred men
will be happy, and we find cases in which people who are not properly equipped and not
properly bred—or rather the other way around, who are properly bred but not happy—the
simplest answer would be [that] these are the exceptions. Now just as people who are
born with four fingers instead of five on one hand, that is against the rule, and that is also
called by Aristotle chance. And in this way one could say that people like Priam or Job,
these are rare cases or chance cases against the rule. This was I think what you meant.
Same Student: Yes, but how does that argue against Aquinas, who says that—what I
assumed that he says—is that those instances themselves demonstrate the necessity of an
afterlife in which a happiness—
LS: Sure, that is true, and Aristotle’s argument would have to be, in the last analysis, that
such an afterlife is impossible because of the dependence of memory, for example, on a
body. I mean, Aristotle does not have the Thomistic view that the soul is a substance
independent of the body, which only for certain purposes, in certain connections, needs
the body, say, for sense perception. Yes?
Mr. Shulsky: Couldn’t you make a stronger argument on the side of Thomas by saying
that it is not only in the accidental case that a good man is made unhappy—and that we
can dismiss by saying it’s a chance occurrence, which doesn’t render the desire vain—but
rather saying that [that] possibility always somehow disturbs the happiness of the happy
man, and hence it’s not that in the accidental case [that] the good man is unhappy, but the
good man is always less than happy because he is always worried that perhaps, you
know, this chance will happen.
LS: But then would he be a good man if he were always worried, if he would pay more
attention to the things not dependent on his will, on his choice, and put such a great store
by the things which do not depend on his will? If someone worries too much, is this not,
as it would be called today, a kind of mental disturbance in itself? And Aristotle would
say it is a vice because Aristotle would say you can get rid of that if you apply your mind
properly.
Mr. Shulsky: But even so, Aristotle says that we have to consider that this man is going
to be happy, is going to be favored by chance or at least not completely disfavored by
chance for the rest of his life before we can call him happy. And hence there’s the
problem that we can never know that, so that, in other words, any attempt to call someone
happy is always sort of somewhat uncertain because we never know that the next minute
he is not going to become quite—
LS: Yes, but he would probably say, as some Englishman said, that the world is quite
crazy but not quite as crazy as that. In other words, the fate of Priam is not the normal
fate of an excellent human being.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

119

Mr. Shulsky: Yes, but even if it’s only the possible fate of an excellent human being—
LS: Yes, but that means unreasonable worrying, and that is a defect of character. I mean,
[it is] intelligible, and we must have compassion with people who do that, but it is still a
moral defect, he would say, I’m afraid.
Mr. Shulsky: But even aside from the worrier, there’s the person like Aristotle who says:
well, what does it mean, or when are we allowed to call someone happy? And even from
the point of view of an observer, Aristotle seems to hedge and never call himself happy.
LS: Well, but he comes down at the end with the assertion—surely, no one would call
Priam in this situation in this situation a happy man. There would be some absurdity in
that. But on the other hand, no one would call him a despicable or contemptible wretch,
whereas one would do that of someone who is, say, justly condemned to death, if I may
use an example no longer fit, but as people, say, in the seventeenth, eighteenth century
used these methods.
Another Student: In a certain sense, though, the phenomenon of nonhappy people is
more widespread in the sense, I would assume, in the argument that people—that some
good, or some men have a natural inclination for contemplation or towards that type of
happiness which comes from contemplation, and yet no one can ever fully achieve that
type of happiness.
LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: I mean, Aquinas’s argument comes on that level, not on the level of
whether there’s an accident that physical attribute—
LS: Yes, but Aristotle grants that. Aristotle grants that. I read to you, I think last time, a
passage from the Metaphysics where Aristotle compares us to bats, bats and their relation
to the light: that is our relation to the truth. And yet Aristotle would say: what else can
you reasonably expect? You cannot define happiness by our desires or wishes; you can
only define happiness with a view to what is humanly possible.
Same Student: In this sense, then, though, isn’t Aristotle himself a—I don’t know what
the correct word is, but at least he’s different than Plato, I would assume. Is not in some
way the Platonic conception of the good life or the happy man connected with the desire
for a good which is in a certain sense incommensurable with the average man or perhaps
all men—
LS: Yes, but that is very hard, you see, because Plato did not write a treatise as Aristotle
did, and one would have to go into the whole dialogue, and that is always a long question.
On the face of it, Plato seems to teach the immortality of the individual soul, especially in
the Phaedo. That is of course true. But what that means can only be established by a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

120

close study of the dialogue. This gentleman, the president of the student’s union. I forget
your name.
Another Student: My question was partly answered by your last remark. But it seemed
that when you were arguing with Mr. . . . behind me, you shifted the ground of the
argument to the afterlife rather than answering the question as to natural . . . But I think
you answered that . . .
LS: He is compelled to take this up because there is a certain complication regarding
happiness. This complication caused Solon to say no one is to be praised happy before his
death. And then the issue of death and after-death comes in in this manner. Aristotle
doesn’t wish to shirk that.
Same Student: Is the question why is it good that the desires, whether they are natural or
not, cannot be fulfilled, is that part of ethics? Or ethics?
LS: Yes, sure. We must know the human good. Is this not true? What is good for man as
man. And then of course we have also to know negatively such notions of the human
good as are not reasonable, because otherwise they might obfuscate both our thoughts
and our actions.
Same Student: Then strictly speaking that would be a question for the science of ethics.
LS: Well, it cannot be the theme. That is a somewhat complicated relation. I will now
state it in an assertoric or dogmatic manner: we must make a2 [distinction] between the de
jure and de facto situation. You know this distinction from international law; I do not
have to explain that. Now de jure: ethics is completely independent of physics or
metaphysics. Man has certain natural inclinations which culminate in the desire for
happiness, and the naturalness of the inclinations means in the case of man that man is
aware of these objectives. And he has also an awareness of the order of rank between
them, so that to have a well-shaped soul is more important than to have a well-shaped
body. That is also known to all people of any delicacy. So we know the ends of human
life. Within these limits then we find the proper means to these ends, and there is an
indefinite variety there: what you should do in Alaska or farther north in order to be
happy, or on the equator, will be greatly different. Ya? And that applies not only
regarding air conditioning and such things [LS chuckles], but it has also to do with some
other things.
Now, so we don’t need any further knowledge, except that knowledge supplied by our
common sense, as we say. Yet there are at all times false opinions regarding the good
human life. At all times. Think today of communism as an example. And these false
opinions make impossible commonsensical, sound, practically wise action. And therefore
it is necessary for the teacher of ethics or politics to engage in a theoretical criticism of
those theoretical opinions that endanger sound practice. So de facto, you can therefore
say, ethics is in need of a theoretical defense of its basis. And this is implied by Aristotle,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

121

but it is not made the theme. Therefore there is very little discussion of theoretical false
opinions endangering practice.
Student: In a certain sense it would be impossible to write the Ethics, or at least the way
Aristotle writes the Ethics, without having previously answered the metaphysical—
LS: Yes, that one can say. It is the same Aristotle who writes the Physics and the Ethics,
not only [that] it so happens, but you see the same style of thinking there, that’s true. And
the Aristotelian view that the true being par excellence is this here dog and not atoms, nor
the four elements, nor the Platonic ideas, this is the same spirit which animates his Ethics,
you know, this incarnation of common sense.
Same Student: To evaluate common opinion, you have to have a metaphysical
understanding of—
LS: Ya, but that is not so simple. We use the word “metaphysical” with great ease, and it
is not an Aristotelian term. I mean, a certain book of Aristotle was called by its editors
the Metaphysics, and only because it took the place in their arrangement after the Physics,
which is a literal translation of meta ta physica. And that is the origin of our word. For
Aristotle there is a thing he calls the first philosophy. That is what he gives in his book
called Metaphysics. But it is wiser to take the independence of the Ethics seriously than
to question it. We will come across passages where we see the limitations of this
independence, but it is more important, at least for the understanding of the Ethics as a
whole, to see that this book is meant to be independent of any theoretical science.
Dependence on the theoretical science becomes necessary in the first place because there
are so many false theories around which obfuscate our natural understanding of the
objects of human action.
Student: Precisely that natural understanding is what—somehow that only becomes
significant, to speak of a natural understanding, doesn’t it, if you engaged in first
philosophy prior to it.
LS: Not quite. Just as dogs and cats, horses, and birds have certain desires peculiar to
them, and without being taught by anyone, natural[ly], why should not man also have
some objectives peculiar to his nature, fitting his nature, just as the objects of the desire
of the horse are in agreement with his nature? Why should this not be so? Of course there
is this complication, that man has an awareness of them as objectives, which the dogs,
cats, and so on do not have. Yes, that is certainly true. This means that there is an
essential difference between man and nonman, a difference which Aristotle brings out by
saying [that] man is the animal that possesses discourse or reason. But in spite of this
enormous difference, this generality—nature, end, specific end, specific nature directed at
a specific end—is common to man and to all other living beings.
There was someone else? Yes. Oh, quite a few. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

122

Student: The section on the causes of happiness. He lays out five causes—leaving aside,
for a moment, chance—
LS: The section on what?
Same Student: On the causes of happiness. He lays out five causes: leaving aside chance
and divine cause leaves learning, habituation, and some kind of training. Now is that
some kind of training, is that the same thing as skill?
LS: Yes, for example, skill of riding. Ya? Swimming.
Same Student: It seems like, for instance, in the case of courage that courage could not
depend on, say, how well a man could use a sword.
LS: No, no, therefore he speaks of habituation in that case and not of practice. Askesis in
Greek. There is a long discussion of how virtue is acquired. That is not immediately
pertinent to what we are discussing now. Yes?
Student: It seems odd for Aristotle to say that it would be unnatural for Priam and Job to
desire happiness. In a way, to cease to desire to be happy, aren’t they ceasing to be men?
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: Did you not claim that Aristotle’s reply to Aquinas’s objection would be
that it is unnatural to desire that which is intrinsically impossible?
LS: Well, I did not hear you clearly. What I said was this: it is not natural to desire the
impossible.
Same Student: So therefore it is not natural for people who are repulsively ugly or not of
good breeding to desire to be happy.
LS: They could still desire to be happy. But the question is—well, the final solution to
the difficulty comes eventually at the end: the most solid happiness and the true
happiness is that of contemplative life. And there these differences are not so important.
They cease to be important on that highest level. But the first sentence of the
Metaphysics, that all men desire by nature to know,v that is a starting point for Aristotle’s
understanding of happiness. Well, eventual understanding, not the one with which he
starts in the Ethics. And from this it follows that men desire by nature above all the
highest kind of knowledge, because if you desire knowledge then you desire by
implication that knowledge which is the most comprehensive and most fundamental of all
knowledge: philosophy. That doesn’t mean that all human beings in fact desire that
knowledge, because there are so many obstructions and impediments to it that this can
never fully develop in most cases, and yet it is the highest human objective. Yes?
v

Aristotle, Metaphysics 980a21.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

123

Same Student: But then what Aquinas would say about this is that there are many men
who do not have the equipment to achieve this—
LS: Sure. Sure.
Same Student: He would say, I suppose, that since this desire is natural, as
Aristotle . . . at this point the natural desires could not be in vain, that this points to the
satisfaction of the desire in some life other than this life.
LS: Yes. That is true, and that is in a way at first glance a superior solution. But you get
an equivalent of the difficulty in another form, namely, if then happiness [comes] after
life—heaven or hell3—now the majority of men will not deserve heaven. You have the
same difficulty then on another ground here, too. So in other words, a solution according
to which all men can be happy in the sense that they have a very high chance of
becoming happy is too sanguine according to the premodern view. And you know the
view which prevailed in the last centuries (or the last century, we should perhaps say) is:
since this is so, we must redefine happiness so that it can be achieved by political,
communal action for everybody, and preferably even without the individual doing much
about it, due to political action only. This also, I believe, is not free from difficulties.
But at any rate, Aristotle’s view: I mentioned, I believe, on an earlier occasion, Aristotle
makes certain tacit assumptions, such as the scarcity of natural resources which
inevitably leads to the consequence that the human beings of independent means—I
mean, not necessarily very wealthy—will be always a minority, or as the Bible puts it:
the poor will always be with you.vi And they, according to Aristotle, are disqualified. But
given his assumption, he acts reasonably. Now we have learned that this assumption is
wrong, that this economy of scarcity can be replaced by an economy of plenty. The
difficulty is only that this solution leads to difficulties of its own. And I believe we
cannot diagnose properly these difficulties besetting us today if we do not bust the case
wide open and consider alternative views of human happiness, like the view of Aristotle
and its implications. In addition, our modern views—I mean, produced by people like
Bacon and Descartes for the first time in the seventeenth century—are consciously
directed against Aristotle and at least in this sense based on Aristotle, because if you
oppose something and your thought comes into being through the opposition to another
position, your position is in an important sense based on that. I would love to continue
that, but we have to read a bit more. Or is it very urgent?
Student: You were, I thought, unfair to Aquinas in the sense that for Aquinas it’s at least
naturally possible for all men to achieve the end, whereas for Aristotle it is a natural
impossibility for all men to achieve contemplation of the requirement’s naturally
impossible.
LS: Yes. But then what does this mean in practical terms given the fact, which for
Thomas is a fact, of original sin?
vi

Matthew 26:11.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

124

Student: But there is another fact, of the incarnation.
LS: But is there not also a distinction between the elected and the damned? Is there not
some kind of predestination, perhaps?
Student: Yeah, but not naturally.
LS: Surely not naturally, because the whole question is now on a supernatural basis.
Therefore you dispose of all natural difficulties by transcending the natural towards the
supernatural. But you get difficulties of their own there. That is all I [will] say.
Now we must now turn to the next chapter which concludes the discussion on happiness.
The situation is this: virtuous activity is the core of happiness. Happiness is in principle
available through human causation. That is what we want. Then we are the producers of
our own bliss, and that is given to us. Wonderful. “But,” Aristotle says. Let us read the
beginning of the next chapter.
Reader: At “these questions being settled”?
LS: Yes.
Reader:
These questions being settled, let us consider whether happiness is one of the things we
praise or rather one of those that we honour; for it is, at all events, clear that it is not a
mere potentiality.
LS: Ya, or “ability” or so. Well, what we have to know about this distinction is only this:
“abilities,” or “potentialities,” are things which can be used well or ill and therefore do
not belong to the praiseworthy things, because what can be misused is as such not
praiseworthy. I would say the other things, the interesting things, are divided into things
deserving praise and things deserving reverence. I believe that is better than to translate it
by “honorable,” because the praiseworthy and the honorable are the same. Deserving
reverence, deserving to be revered. Now?
Reader:
Now it is seen that a thing which we praise is always praised because it has a certain
quality and stands in a certain relation to something. For we praise just men and brave
men, in fact good men and virtue generally, because of their actions and works;vii and we
praise the strong, the swift of foot,viii and the like on account of their possessing certain
natural qualities, and standing in a certain relation to something good and excellent.
(1101b10-18)
LS: So “praise” refers to a man’s having a certain quality. Poion tis: a certain quality. A
good runner, a just man: they’re all qualities. And we have in mind that this is
vii
viii

In Rackham’s translation: “actions and the results they produce.”
In Rackham’s translation: “and we praise the men who are strong of body, swift of foot.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

125

praiseworthy because it is productive of certain actions or works: swift-running, just
actions, or whatever you have. So the implication already here is that the praiseworthy is
lower than the things to be revered, because it has this relativity: not in the sense in which
the term is now used in relativism, but it is relative to actions. It does not have this
intrinsic superiority which the other objects have. Yes?
Reader:
The point is also illustrated by our feeling about praises addressed to the gods: it is
evidently ridiculous ix that the gods should be referred to our standards, and this is what
praising them amounts to, since praise, as we said, involves a reference of its object as to
something else.
LS: Let us stop here. Praise is relative, I said, namely, to human actions. And Aristotle
goes here so far [as] to say [that] if we praise the gods—and that does not correspond to
our usage and understanding at all—if we praise the gods, we praise them with a view to
us, to the benefit they give to us or the misfortunes they keep from us, and so on. And
therefore one cannot praise the gods, strictly speaking, in this sense. Yes?
Reader:
But if praise belongs to what is relative, it is clear that the best things merit not praise but
something greater and better: as indeed is generally recognized, since we speak of the
gods as blessed and happy, and also ‘blessed’ is the term that we apply to the most
godlike men; and similarly with good things—no one praises happiness as one praises
justice, but we call it ‘a blessing,’ deeming it something higher and more divine than
things we praise. (1101b218-27)
LS: There must then be something higher than praise or the praiseworthy, and these
things are according to the general notions the gods, but also, closer to our subject,
happiness in contradistinction to virtue or virtuous action. Happiness belongs to the same
sphere to which the gods belong, and virtuous action does not. That is quite surprising,
after we have heard hitherto that virtue is the core of happiness. There is something in
happiness which transcends virtue. That we have seen before. And Aristotle says that
which transcends virtue is in a way—“in a way” is my addition—is in a way higher than
what we can possibly do. We can also say [that] beings [that are] revered are not revered
for being of such and such a quality. Honor thy father and thy mother: it is not said,
“Honor thy father and thy mother if they are good,” the meaning being that there is
something in parenthood which deserves reverence independently of goodness and
badness. Now the same is true, of course, of the gods: the gods cannot be measured by
the standards of human virtue, but as beings, not because of their qualities are they to be
revered.
Come to think of it, what Aristotle says is not so alien to what we mean by happiness, the
word we translate (the Greek word eudaimonia) by “happiness.” And this is of course a
word which we use very frequently and therefore it has lost much of the force of the
Greek word eudaimonia, “having a good demon.” But we use other words from time to
ix

In Rackham’s translation: “it strikes us as absurd.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

126

time, more rarely, perhaps: blessed, blessings. For example, to have many children and
good children is a part of happiness, as Aristotle said. We call it also sometimes a
blessing, and then a very different connotation comes in and then it seems to be [that] a
blessing is something higher than what we can do for ourselves. This is a phenomenon to
which Aristotle refers here. Yes?
Reader:
Indeed it seems that Eudoxus took a good line in advocating the claims of pleasure to the
prize of highest excellence when he held that the fact that pleasure, though a good, is not
praised, is an indication that it is superior to the things we praise, as God and the Good
are, because they are the standards to which everything else is referred.
For praise belongs to virtue,x since it is this that makes men capable of accomplishing
noble deeds—
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. Now he refers to Eudoxus, a famous mathematician
of whom he speaks later on. Eudoxus was a hedonist, an adherent of the view that the
good is identical with the pleasant. Aristotle disagrees with Eudoxus, as appears later. But
here he uses Eudoxus’s view only for illustrating what he means, not4 [because] he
subscribes to Eudoxus altogether. The distinction between the praiseworthy and the
things deserving reverence can even be used for making a case in favor of pleasure,
because pleasure has this peculiar character: that you cannot strictly speaking produce it.
Now what Aristotle means means by that becomes clear much later on. Can you quickly
look up 1174b, toward the end?
Reader:
But the pleasure perfects the activity, not as the fixed disposition does, by being already
present in the agent, but as a supervening perfection, like the bloom of health in the
young and vigorous. (1174b31-34)
LS: A “supervening perfection” is something which is like the bloom. This bloom is not
the same as health, and yet it is something very wonderful. That is in a way Aristotle’s
last word on pleasure, and therefore in this sense one can say it is divine, if you mean so
far as man cannot produce it, at least [not] at the higher forms of pleasure. Then there
comes a brief digression, which we read.
Reader:
While encomia are for deeds accomplished, whether of the body or of the soul. xi
However, to develop this subject is perhaps rather the business of those who have made a
study of encomia. (1101b17-35)
LS: What he means here is simply that there are two kinds of speeches or writings:
praises, epainoi—well, we know them especially in the form of eulogies—and another
are encomia. The eulogies, the praises, consist of enumeration of5 [a man’s] virtues, and
x
xi

In Rackham’s translation: “goodness.”
In Rackham’s translation: “whether bodily feats or achievements of the mind.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

127

the encomia consist in the description of his deeds. This was a distinction which Aristotle
obviously accepted.—xii
So the supremacy of happiness, in contradistinction to virtue and virtuous activity, is
maintained by Aristotle. Man owes the best not to himself, although what he does is the
indispensable prerequisite of his receiving the best; therefore his virtue is the
indispensable condition for happiness. Now from this view, that man owes the best not to
himself, it follows that the right posture toward the best, and therefore toward life in
general, is gratitude, not self-reliance, and still less a posture of demanding.
Happiness is in a way (as it was said before, although there criticized by Aristotle)
god-sent or god-given. The phrases occurred [in] 1099b9 to 10. That is the end of the
discussion of happiness. And if this is not elegant as the mathematicians speak of elegant
proofs, Aristotle had warned us in advance that we cannot expect this kind of elegance
when we speak of human things, and especially of human happiness, which is a frail
thing and therefore we cannot speak about it without some hemming and hawing. And
this is not Aristotle’s fault: it is the fault, if it can be said to be the fault, of the things
themselves. And to be loyal to the things themselves, this was perhaps the ambition of
Aristotle more than of anybody else.
So this is then the end of the discussion of happiness and in a way the end of book 1,
because the chapter which follows is already the transition to book 2, or even to the
whole rest of the work. Now this is a good moment perhaps to give a brief survey of the
plan of book 1 up to this point, and which may be helpful also for reminding you of what
we may have forgotten.
Now there is a first section going up to 1095a13, where Aristotle speaks of the many ends
of various kinds and the corresponding manyness of arts, leading up to the suggestion
that there is a highest art, the political art. And therefore there is presumably also a
highest end, the object of that highest art. And Aristotle concludes his discussion by a
remark on the exactness to be expected in this investigation.
The second section, up to 1095b13: the highest good, the highest end, is called by all men
with the same name, namely, happiness. Therefore there is some agreement among all
men that there is one and only one highest end, because it is no accident [that] they [all]
use6 the same name for it. In this brief section he discusses also what kind of principle of
the investigation we can reasonably expect. He does not speak there of exactness.
The third section, leading up to 1097a14, deals with the various false opinions about
happiness: (a) popular opinions, (b) opinions of wise men. In this case, only the opinions
of a single wise man, namely, Plato.
The fourth section (1097a15 to b21): Aristotle gives here some general determination of
what happiness is.
xii

The tape was changed at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

128

In the next section, the fifth section (1097b22 to 1098b8), he gives his definition of
happiness—his logos on happiness, as he calls it. And this is concluded again by a
reflection on both exactness and on the kind of principles with which we may have to be
concerned.
Then in the sixth part (1098b9 to 1099b9), Aristotle confronts his logos, his definition,
with what is generally said about happiness. And here the pleasant things come to the
fore for the first time, and therewith the difficulties caused by the misfortunes of the good
man.
Seven (1099b10 to 1101b9): Can any man be called happy while he is still alive? The
solution of the difficulties: virtuous activity is the core of happiness. And therefore Priam
can never have become a wretch.
And then a kind of compensation for the seventh part in the eighth (1101b10 to 1102a4):
happiness belongs to a higher sphere than virtue and virtuous activity. And I think here
you see in this way the difficulties with which we are confronted. But I think the
difficulties are not just due to Aristotle’s special prejudices or preoccupations or what
[have you], but they lie in the subject matter. And they would come out in very different
forms on non-Aristotelian premises, but come out they would.
Now we should by all means read the next chapter, the transition to the sequel. And I
would like to say only one word about my present plan of how we shall proceed. I think
we should read book 2 and the first half of book 3, because this is a general discussion of
virtue. After all, we have to know what virtue is after we have heard so many good things
about her. And then, [so] that we get a somewhat more exact or concrete notion of what
Aristotle understands by virtue, we should read the section on the first virtue that he
discusses, namely, courage, and on the two virtues which Aristotle regards as particularly
praiseworthy and high: one is called magnanimity, and the other is called justice. And so
we have—magnanimity is discussed in book 4, and the whole of book 5 is devoted to
justice. So that is the first half of the book; and we will cross the bridge (what we will do
afterward) when we have come to it. We should read if possible also book 6 and sections
of book 10. That is generally my plan. Now shall we then at least begin with the next
chapter?
Reader:
But inasmuch as happiness is a certain activity of the soul in conformity with perfect
virtue, it is necessary to examine virtue. For this will probably assist us in our
investigation of happiness.xiii (1102a5-7)
LS: So Aristotle returns here then to the assertion that preponderates in his presentation.
The core of happiness is virtue, and therefore we must naturally investigate virtue above

xiii

In Rackham’s translation: “But inasmuch as happiness is a certain activity of soul in
conformity with perfect goodness, it is necessary to examine the nature of goodness. For this will
probably assist us in our investigation of the nature of happiness.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

129

everything else, yet “for the sake of a better understanding of happiness”: to this extent
the supremacy or primacy of happiness is preserved here. Do you want to say something?
Student: I wanted to know if there was possibly a political motive in that it’s just to sort
of assuage the sentiments of the gentlemen who are reading that virtuous activity—there
is inevitably an ambiguity between the core of happiness being virtuous activity, while at
the same time happiness in a kind of way is superior to virtuous activity in the sense that
it subsumes virtuous activity so that virtue is in a way kind of almost shunted into the
background.
LS: Not quite. I mean, I believe that has to do with the substantive difficulties, and we do
not have to trace these difficulties to the defects of the hearers. It has to do with the things
you have in mind only with a view to the fact that from Aristotle’s ultimate point of view,
the contemplative life is the happy life, and therefore the questions as they arise on the
level of moral virtue are not the final form in which the question of happiness poses itself
to man. But it poses itself on the level of moral virtue to most men, and therefore it is
very important to understand that, especially politically. Yes?
Student: Is it reasonable to understand the relationship between virtue and true happiness
in Aristotle as somewhat of a Platonic relationship between—a Platonic participation? Is
it reasonable to understand it that way?
LS: You mean that the merely moral man, the perfect gentleman, participates in the true
happiness to some extent? Yes, that is all right.
Same Student: Now can we understand it also this way on a slightly higher plane: that
happiness being the supreme good, virtue being good, there is a relationship between the
individual good and the—I won’t say the idea of the good, but something like that—in
much the same way that there is in Plato? In other words, does Aristotle really come back
to this type of relationship . . .
LS: No, I mean the ideas in the Platonic sense are out. There is an end of man, a
perfection of man, and this perfection is, strictly understood, one and the same for all
men, although most men are paradoxically debarred from it. Yet all men must be judged
in the light of that. I mean, we need the unity of a standard, although we do not need
necessarily a unity of the actual goal for all men. There may be a variety of goals, higher
and lower, and it may be necessary because of the complications. And there are all kinds
of activities which are needed in society, and some require more qualities of the mind and
character than others; and that is so, and therefore to expect the same, to demand the
same standard of excellence from all men is unreasonable on this Platonic and
Aristotelian view. Now let us go on.
Reader:
Also, the true statesman seems to be one who has made a special study of goodness, since
his aim is to make the citizens good and law-abiding men. (1102a7-10)

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

130

LS: Let us stop here. By the way, “goodness” is a translation of the Greek word aretē,
which is ordinarily translated by “virtue.” And some people translate it now by
“excellence” because they want to get rid of the unpleasant meanings of “virtue.” As a
witty man has said, virtue (virtus in Latin, derived from vir, man), meant originally, [and]
also for the Greeks, the manliness of men, and has now come to mean the chastity of
women only. And that is a very narrow part of virtue, and therefore people are
dissatisfied with the term virtue. So I warn you only [so] that you don’t think there is
another term when he suddenly speaks of good. Yes?
Student: . . . the distinction between virtue and . . .
LS: I think, especially if something is very unpopular for unreasonable reasons, then one
should translate very literally and not shirk the unpopularity.
Same Student: But I was thinking more in terms of the Meno and the question of
how . . . being read. And Aristotle’s tendency to sympathize with the first answer that
Meno . . .
LS: Yes, but he discusses this in the Politics somewhere, not here. Perhaps we take it up
when we come to Aristotle’s discussion of virtue. Surely Aristotle does not say virtue is
knowledge or science. Surely not.
Now here, this point: he gives here a further reason why we should study what virtue is.
The highest good is the object of the highest art, namely, the political art. But the true
political man wishes to make the citizens good and law-abiding. Now what has lawabiding to do with good? A law-abiding man is a man who obeys the laws regardless of
whether they are good and bad. That is a difficulty of which no one was more aware than
Aristotle. But in the best case, what the law-abiding man really is meant to be is7 [a man
who obeys] good laws. Yes. Now this remark about the desire of the true political man
can be illustrated by a passage in Xenophon’s Memorabilia, book 3, chapter 2. It is too
long—it is a very charming chapter, and it is only one page long, so you should read it. I
can read to you only the concluding remark: “By these considerations on what constitutes
the virtue of a good leader, Socrates disregarded everything else and left only this much:
that it is the function of the good leader to make happy those whom he leads.”xiv
Now Aristotle is very much concerned with happiness, as we have seen, but he does not
say, interestingly enough, that it is the task of the true political man to make the citizens
happy; he only says it is his task to make them good and obedient to the law. So the
distinction between happiness and virtue is here effective, although not explicitly stated.
Happiness and virtue belong together; they are not simply identical, as we have seen
before. Now the next passage, and then we are through.
Reader:

xiv

Strauss’s translation.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 8

131

As examples, we have the lawgivers of Crete and Sparta, and others, if there have ever
been other such.xv (1102a10-12)
LS: Yes. Your amusement is not wholly unjustified. That is quite true. Now here I read
to you a brief remark from the seventh book of the Politics, 1333b5, following:
“Even those Greeks of the present day who are reputed to best govern, and the legislators
who gave them their constitutions, do not appear to have framed their government with
regard to the best end, or to have given them laws and education with a view to all the
virtues, but in a vulgar spirit have fallen back on those which promised to be more useful
and profitable. Many modern writers have taken a similar view. They commend the
Spartan constitution and praise the legislator for making conquest and war his sole
aim.”xvi
And so on. That implies (and there are other passages) that the Spartans and Cretans, of
whom he speaks here so highly, and their legislators were not such wise legislators as
they seem to be here. This difficulty was of course observed by the professional
commentators, but they have a simple way out: this was written by Aristotle at a different
time. That is invariable. And then they figure out when did he write the first book of the
Ethics, and when did he write the seventh book of the Politics. The book of Werner
Jaeger on Aristotle is the most well-known document of this approach. xvii You should
perhaps read, if you have not done so before, Ernest Barker’s critique of Werner Jaeger in
the introduction to his translation of Aristotle’s Politics, where he tries to show on what
slippery ground these hypotheses are based. xviii The reason is very simple: Aristotle
begins at the beginning. Now the beginning has to do with this perfect gentleman who
had pro-Spartan sympathies, as we know from Thucydides and so. You know? And there
is no reason why he should question them. When they are more advanced in their training
by Aristotle, he will tell them that Sparta and Crete are very far from being models of
political perfection.
I think we have to stop at this point, and next time we will continue that and begin with
the second book.
1

Deleted “that.”
Deleted “difference.”
3
Deleted “and.”
4
Deleted “while.”
5
Deleted “his.”
6
Moved “all.”
7
Deleted “to obey.”
2

xv

In Rackham’s translation: “witness the lawgivers of Crete and Sparta, and the other great
legislators of history.”
xvi
Aristotle, Politics 1333b5-14. Presumably Strauss’s translation.
xvii
Werner Jaeger, Aristoteles. Grundlegung einer Geschichte seiner Entwicklung (Berlin:
Weidmannsche Buchhandlung, 1923). See Werner Jaeger, Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History
of His Development, trans. Richard Robinson (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1934).
xviii
Aristotle, The Politics of Aristotle, trans. Ernest Barker (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

132

Session 9: March 11, 1968
Leo Strauss: So, well, let us remind1 [ourselves] for a moment of the title of this course:
“The Moral Foundations of Politics.” Well, we have been reminded of it, I think, by
Aristotle himself, when he says that the true political man, the true statesman, wishes to
make the citizens good and subject and obedient to the laws. The emphasis is on good
because laws, as we know, may be bad, and therefore to make them obedient to bad laws
is perhaps not a great feat of statesmanship. Now in order to see the importance of this
statement of Aristotle, we have to compare it not only with Machiavelli, as we
occasionally did, but I read to you a passage from Locke. Locke says, “quote, however
strange it may seem, the lawmaker has nothing to do with moral virtues and vices,
unquote.”i But he is limited in his function to the preservation of property, so that in his
way Locke is on the side of Machiavelli, i.e., not on the side of the angels, and Aristotle
definitely is. [Laughter] This I think we should not entirely forget.
Now we began to read the last chapter of the first book of the Ethics last time. I remind
you of the context. The highest good is happiness or bliss. And here there is this
complication. The core of happiness is excellent activity of the soul, yet happiness is
venerable, an object of reverence, whereas the excellent activity of the soul is only
praiseworthy, as we have seen. Happiness, in other words, is a blessing, whereas moral
virtue especially, but also all virtue, is not a blessing. Take the simple case: you don’t say
X has something to be grateful for [if] he is an honest man. That is supposed to be his
own work. There are certain complications here, as we know on the basis of theology, but
taking the simple commonsense view, it is just something which is expected of everyone
and not something for which he is to be grateful. Now after having explained this
complicated difficulty regarding happiness, Aristotle makes a natural transition to virtue,
because virtue is after all the core of happiness; and we began to read this chapter, and I
think we should continue where we left off, and that was 1102a12. If, Mr. Pangle, you
would be so good.
Reader:
But if the study of goodness falls within the province of Political Science, it is clear that
in investigating goodness we shall be keeping to the plan which we adopted at the
outset.ii (1102a12-13)
LS: So the study of virtue does not entirely depend on the result of Aristotle’s definition
of happiness. It is sufficient to start from the two accepted opinions, which are accepted
without discussion: first, that the political art is the architectonic art; and second, that2 the
work of the true statesman [is] to raise the moral level of a society to its highest pitch.
i

This remark is drawn from Locke’s notes preserved in the Lovelace papers held at the Bodleian
Library at Oxford and is reported in J. W. Gough, John Locke’s Political Philosophy: Eight
Studies (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1950), 190. See Leo Strauss, “On Locke’s Doctrine of Natural
Right,” The Philosophical Review 61 (1952): 475-502.
ii
The student reads from Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. H. Rackham (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1934).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

133

Given this, it follows that we must study virtue, even if we would not fully agree with
Aristotle’s analysis of happiness. Yes?
Student: May I ask a quick question?
LS: Please.
Same Student: Why does Aristotle say “if” here now: “if the study of goodness.” Is that
just a logical if, or is there still some doubt? “If the study of goodness falls within the
boundaries—”
LS: No. What he means by that, I believe, is this. That he had said right at the beginning
of the first chapter, that there is a variety of ends and a variety of arts, but we see a
highest art, the political art, and therefore we can assume that there is also a highest end.
That was the starting point. He did not start from the premise that there is a highest end,
but deduced it at a later point. Now in a way what Aristotle means here, it seems, is this:
if the investigation of virtue belongs to the political art, then our investigation is in
perfect agreement with what we said right at the beginning. That, I believe, is what he
means by that. Now?
Reader:
Now the virtue that we have to consider is clearly human virtue, since the good or
happiness which we set out to seek was human good and human happiness. But human
virtue means in our view excellence of soul, not excellence of body; also our definition of
happiness is an activity of the soul. iii
LS: Yes. Now this seems to go without saying, but one should not take too much for
granted. So the investigation concerns the virtue of the human soul. First: of the soul, not
of the body (that would be the matter for the physician or gymnastic trainer), and the
virtue of the human soul, because conceivably there might be virtues of the souls of
animals as well as of a wasp. This would not be the subject of political science, which
deals emphatically with the human things, neither subhuman nor superhuman. Yes?
Reader:
Now if this is so, clearly it behoves the statesman to have some acquaintance with things
concerning the soul,iv just as the physician who is to heal the eye or the other parts of the
body must know their anatomy. And more so, inasmuch as politics is more honorable and
better than medicine;v but physicians of the better class devote much attention to the
study of the human body. (1102a13-23)
LS: Yes. Now what does he mean? He makes the comparison first in order to make this
clear: that the political man, the statesman, should be a knower of the human soul. That
iii

Throughout this passage, the reader substitutes “virtue” for Rackham’s “goodness.”
In Rackham’s translation: “psychology.”
v
In Rackham’s translation: “Indeed a foundation of science is even more requisite for the
statesman, inasmuch as politics is a higher and more honourable art than medicine.”
iv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

134

might seem to impose an unreasonable burden on him. Think of many famous statesmen
who were very far from the theoretical vein in any way.
So he compares the political man with the physician, with the healer of the body, not with
the one who builds up the strength of the body, the gymnastic trainer. So therefore,
traditionally ethics and even philosophy was called the medicine of the soul, which cures
the soul rather than [making]3 it healthy, strong, in the first place. Curing presupposes a
previous disease. That is of some importance. It is not necessary that the untrained man is
sick, but the physician has a much higher status than the gymnastic trainer. This would be
a reason why he would compare him to the physician and not to the gymnastic trainer.
You know, there is one reason why he should compare him to the gymnastic trainer, as I
stated before, because the first thing is to build up the human soul properly, and not to
cure it from the diseases which it has contracted. But the explanation is simple: the
physician is a socially respected man and the gymnastic trainer is not. This is the first
point. But strangely, Aristotle compares the statesman not with the physician as such, but
with the opthalmologist, with a specialist. Why does he do that? Well, perhaps we can
say that the statesman deals only with a part of the soul, just as the opthalmologist deals
only with a part of the body and nevertheless has to have some knowledge of the whole
body. I believe this interpretation is confirmed by the sequel, where Aristotle makes plain
that only a very limited knowledge of the soul is required of the statesman. Yes?
Reader:
The student of politics therefore must study the soul. vi
LS: You see he changes all the words: “student of politics,” “statesman.” It is in Greek
always the same word, “the political one,” literally translated, meaning the man who
possesses the political art. vii Yes?
Reader:
The statesman therefore must study the soul, though he will do so as an aid to politics,
and only so far as is requisite for the objects of inquiry that he has in view: to pursue the
subject in further detail would probably be more laborious than is necessary for his
purpose.
LS: So in other words, according to Aristotle there is no need for scientific psychology.
And you see the contrast with today immediately. But what Aristotle says, however, is in
fundamental agreement with what Plato suggests. Do you remember where Plato speaks
about this subject, in a rather well-known work? Yes, what does he say there?
Student: After dividing . . . soul into three parts . . .
LS: And why is this not scientific psychology?

vi

In Rackham’s translation: “The student of politics therefore as well as the psychologist must
study the nature of the soul.”
vii
Strauss retranslates ho politikos.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

135

Student: . . .
LS: Well, Plato speaks explicitly in the Republic somewhereviii of the fact that there is a
longer way regarding the soul which will not be taken in this work, so that it is a
provisional study of the soul, sufficient for that purpose. The same is true of the
psychology which Aristotle is now going to use, and which would have to be rewritten
very radically in order to fit perfectly with the true or scientific teaching regarding the
soul. Yes?
Reader:
Now on the subject, some of the teaching current in exoteric discourses ix is satisfactory,
and may be adopted here: namely that the soul consists of two parts, one irrational and
the other capable of reason. (1102a23-28)
LS: Now the word “exoteric,” what that means is controversial. It may mean “popular,”
“not strictly academic,” “scientific”; and it may mean “external to the present study.”
Therefore, say, an ethical study would be exoteric to physics, and physical studies would
be exoteric to ethics. It is impossible to decide in every passage what the word exoteric
means. One could translate it by “external,” understanding this ambiguity: external
meaning for people who are not in the inside, and meaning the subject matter is not
inside. Yes?
Reader:
(Whether these two parts are really distinct in the sense that the parts of the body or of
any other divisible whole are distinct, or whether though distinguishable in thought as
two they are inseparable by nature, like the convex and concave sides of the curve, makes
no difference to the matter in hand.) x
LS: In other words, here we have an example. The precise meaning of parts here, a
rational and an irrational part, is of no interest for our present purpose. It is sufficient that
they are distinguishable from each other. Yes?
Reader:
Of the irrational part of the soul again one division appears to be common to all living
things, and of a vegetative nature: I refer to the part that causes nutrition and growth; for
we must assume that a vital faculty of this nature exists in all things that assimilate
nourishment, including embryos—the same faculty being present also in the fullydeveloped organism (this is more reasonable than to assume a different nutritive faculty
in the latter). The excellence of this faculty therefore appears to be common to all
animate things and not peculiar to man; for it is believed that this faculty or part of the
soul is most active during sleep, but when they are asleep you cannot tell a good man
viii

Republic 435c-d and 504bff.
In Rackham’s translation: “Now on the subject of psychology some of the teaching current in
extraneous discourses.”
x
In Rackham’s translation: “inseparable in reality, like the convex and concave sides of a curve,
is a question of no importance for the matter in hand.”
ix

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

136

from a bad one (whence the saying that for half their lives there is no difference between
the happy and the miserable). This is a reasonable xi result forxii sleep is a cessation of the
soul from the activities on which its goodness or badness depends—except that in some
small degree certain of the sense-impressions may reach the soul during sleep, and
consequently the dreams of the good are better than those of ordinary men. We need not
however pursue this subject further, but may omit from consideration the nutritive part of
the soul, since it exhibits no specifically human excellence.
LS: Yes. Now he speaks now of a part of a part, namely, the part of the nonrational soul:
the nutritive part, which is irrelevant as far as human virtue and vice is concerned,
because that is not specifically human and therefore specifically human goodness and
badness cannot be found there. Take, say, a man is not called a good man or a bad man
with a view to his digestion, obviously. And we say he has a good digestion or a bad
digestion, but we do not say he is a good man or a bad man, and therefore this is of no
importance to an ethical study. Yes?
Reader:
But there also appears to be another natural element in the soul, which, though irrational,
yet in a manner participates in rational principle. (1102a28-b14)
LS: Now he had spoken of this before, that there was such a part of the soul which is in
between the rational and the irrational. There he said this part belongs to the rational
part.xiii But now he says that it belongs to the irrational one, but participating in reason.
Now this is a certain progress of the argument. The first and roughest statement is to the
effect that it is rational, because it has something to do with reason. The more refined
statement is: it is not rational, but it has a certain nearness to reason, a nearness which
will be explained in the sequel. The term which he uses here is quite strange at first
glance. He says there is some other nature of the soul which seems to be irrational. Now
“nature” has here the meaning rather of a kind of something, a kind or part of something
natural. The natural being, the soul, is the natural part of a natural being. Yes?
Reader:
In self-restrained and unrestrained people we approve their principle, or the rational part
of their souls, because it urges them in the right way and exhorts them to the best course;
but their nature seems also to contain another element beside that of rational principle,
which combats and resists that principle. Exactly the same thing may take place in the
soul as occurs with the body in a case of paralysis: when the patient wills to move his
limbs to the right they swerve to the left; and similarly in unrestrained persons their
impulses run counter to their principle. But whereas in the body we see the erratic
member, in the case of the soul we do not see it; nevertheless it cannot be doubted that in
the soul also there is an element besides that of principle, which opposes and runs counter
to principle (though in what sense the two are distinct does not concern us here). But this
second element also seems, as we said, to participate in rational principle; at least in the
xi

In Rackham’s translation: “natural.”
In Rackham’s translaiton: “of the fact that.”
xiii
See 1098a3-6.
xii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

137

self-restrained man it obeys the behest of principle—and probablyxiv in the moderatexv
and brave man it is still more amenable, for all of him is in harmony with reason. xvi
(1102b14-28)
LS: Yes. Now Aristotle gives here a third proof that such a nature exists, and the proof is
the phenomenon of continence and its opposite, incontinence. Continence and
incontinence are akin to moderation and its opposite, but they are different; and the
difference is, as he alludes to here, that the moderate man has no bad desires, whereas the
continent man has bad desires but controls them. And it is better to have no bad desires
than4 [to be] able to control them, that is at least Aristotle’s premise.
Now there is something in man that is proven by the fact of continence and incontinence,
because the incontinent man is also a man who knows that he should not, say, smoke and
yet does. That’s incontinence, whereas the man who doesn’t even have the urge to smoke
is moderate. So the incontinent man has this conflict in himself, and this conflict shows a
dualism, of which he speaks. Reason is there, which tells him “Don’t,” and yet [there is]
something else which rebels against reason or which may obey reason. But the fact that it
may obey reason shows that it has a kinship [with the rational part] which the nutritive
part lacks. I mean, digestion does not follow the commands [of reason], or growing does
not follow the commands [of reason]; it cannot follow commands. But this part of which
he speaks now, it can in principle follow commands, just as the members of the body can
obey the command of reason unless they are paralyzed—then of course not, but they can
in themselves.5 This paralysis is merely a privative form of the healthy condition, and the
healthy condition is obedience. The possible disobedience shows that it is not in itself
rational, that it belongs to the irrational, but in the way that it can obey reason, that it can
participate in reason, but it is not in itself rational.We praise even the incontinent man,
that is what Aristotle implies, inasmuch as he approves of the rational principle. That is to
say, he knows at least that it is 6 [right]. We blame him [in light of the fact] that he is
unable in fact to obey it. Yes. Now let us first finish, and then we may have to call you
into discussion. Yes?
Reader:
Thus we see that the irrational part is double. The vegetative part xvii does not share in
rational principle at all; the other, the seat of the appetites and of desire in general, does
in a sense participate in principle, as being amenable and obedient to it (in the sense in
fact in which we speak of—
LS: “Obedient” is too strong: “able to obey it.”
Reader:

xiv

In Rackham’s translation: “no doubt.”
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xvi
In Rackham’s translation: “all parts of his nature are in harmony with principle.”
xvii
In Rackham’s translation: “Thus we see that the irrational part, as well as the soul as a whole,
is double. One division of it, the vegetative.”
xv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

138

able to obey it (in the sense in fact in which we speak of ‘paying heed’ to one’s father and
friends, not in the sense of the term ‘rational’ in mathematics).
LS: Yes. Here now he draws a conclusion regarding the bipartition of the irrational part
of the soul. That part of the irrational which listens—that is to say, which can listen to
reason—listens to reason in the manner comparable to that in which we are said to listen
to our father or our friends, as distinguished from7 [the] way in which we listen to a
teacher of mathematics. “Listening” means here listening to the father as distinguished
from the mathematician. [It] means obeying, being considerate, whereas in the case of
mathematics, the mathematician . . . proper reason and proper listening is understanding
and only understanding. Here in this case, [it means] not understanding but obeying, or
maybe even disobeying; but the disobeying [would not be] possible unless there were the
possibility of obedience. Therefore they belong together. Yes?
Reader:
And that principle can in a manner appeal to the irrational part, is indicated by our
practice of admonishing delinquents, and by our employment of rebuke and exhortation
generally.
If on the other hand it be more correct to speak of the appetitive part of the soul also as
rational, in that case it is the rational part which is divided xviii into two, the one division
having rational principle in the proper sense and in itself, the other obedient to it as the
child to its father. (1102b28-1103a3)
LS: So Aristotle repeats here what he says at the beginning. You see, Aristotle is in no
way pedantic. He says, one may also say, that the higher kind of the irrational is the lower
kind of the rational, as he had said at the beginning.
You don’t understand that? You have a clearly irrational part, the vegetative (say,
digestion), and then you have a clearly rational part which has a reason in itself (say, it’s
a scientific reason). And then there is one in between, which is capable of listening to
reason but does not have the reason in itself, and therefore you can say with a view to its
capability of listening to reason that it is rational. But you can also say, with a view to the
fact that it does not have the reason in itself, it is irrational. Is that not clear?
Student: . . .
LS: Yes. I see. Good. And, yes?
Reader:
Now virtue also is differentiated in correspondence with this division xix. Some forms of
virtue we call intellectual virtues, others moral virtues: Wisdom or intelligence and
Prudence are intellectual, Liberality and moderation xx are moral virtues. When describing
xviii

In Rackham’s translation: “the rational part which, as well as the whole soul, is divided.”
In Rackham’s translation: “division of the soul.”
xx
In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”
xix

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

139

a man’s moral character, we do not say that he is wise or intelligent, but gentle or
moderate;xxi but a wise man also is praised for his disposition, and praiseworthy
dispositions we term virtues. (1103a3-10)
LS: Yes. Now here he makes a crucial distinction which is based on the distinction of the
parts of the soul. The distinction of the rational part of the soul into one which is rational
in itself and another which is rational because it is capable of listening to reason underlies
the distinction between dianoetic or intellectual virtues and ethical virtues. The dianoetic
virtues are the perfections of the intellect in various respects. Aristotle discusses them at
length in book 6. And then there are other virtues which are excellences of the part
obeying reason but not rational itself, and these are the ethical virtues. The distinction is
very obvious, although one need not know the technical terms. I remember a remark
about Perry Mason, that he was sharp like a steel trap and clean like a hound’s tooth. That
is the distinction. A man can have a very sharp mind, and that is something admirable but
it is not a guarantee of his morality, his integrity. On the other hand, he can be a man of
perfect integrity, and yet he does not have to have a sharp mind for that, so these are two
different considerations. Yes? What did you want to say?
Student: Would there be any distinction between the irrational part of the soul, which is
able to listen to reason, and that part of an animal’s soul, in a higher animal, which is
likewise capable of being instructed or being trained in a certain way?
LS: Yes, but still there is all the difference in the world between an education by carrot
and stick only and an education by speech. You know? I mean, the carrot and the stick
means no reason is needed, no thought of consequences. But in the case of man, you can
explain [to] him. Even if you explain to him, “If you act in this and this way, you will get
the carrot, and if you act in the other way you will get the stick,” you can explain it to
him. He doesn’t have to see it immediately. Reason. Therefore the brutes have no ethical
virtues. They may have [qualities analogous] 8 to ethical virtues. We speak of [a] gentle
dog and a savage dog, for example, and apply other ethical terms to animals, but this is
not strictly speaking correct.
Same Student: It seems in a way that this middle form of the soul, the middle part of the
soul is in a certain sense most characteristic of man, rather than the rational part. I mean
that, I mean it sounds kind of silly from that point. But I’m thinking of Aristotle’s view of
the man as the union between the . . .
LS: Yes. Yes, one can say that, and therefore the whole investigation, here and in the
Politics, is called by Aristotle the investigation regarding human things. The purely
intellectual is also in itself superhuman, but the moral virtues are specifically human. He
denies at the end of the book that the gods can have moral virtues, because they do not
have that part which has to be controlled and trained by reason. Yes, that is correct. Now
there is another point. Yes?
Another Student: . . .
xxi

In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

140

LS: Very simply, what does it mean to obey one’s father? The father says something:
“Do this; don’t do that.” That’s a logos, and you must understand the logos. At least—I
mean, first of all, you must understand [that] this and this is a thing which you should or
should not do. And secondly, the father probably will in many cases give a reason—logos
in the other sense—why it is good for you to do it. All these things, I mean, this too for
speech, discourse, reason.
Another Student: But it’s—in the sense that it admits that logos—the sense is
decisive . . . you wouldn’t say that it would be on the side of the rational instead of the
irrational . . . it partakes in persuasion or takes place in speech.
LS: An example which Plato likes, one taken from some verses of Homer: how you can
talk to your passion, to your anger, for example. And that means it is persuadable, and
therefore it is capable of listening to reason and therefore it is not irrational simply. But
on the other hand, something else in you must talk to it: the anger doesn’t persuade itself
to cease to be angry, but reason tells it to cease. [This] shows that it is not simply rational.
Yes?
Another Student: Is it fair to say that Aristotle did not consider the possibility of a
perversion of the highest part of the soul, the perversion of reason?
LS: Of course. Well, that would be very bad, if he had not done that, and that would be
of no interest. I mean, there were so many great examples of people who perverted their
reason, their very powerful intellectual qualities: think [of] a man like Alcibiades from
Aristotle’s point of view, perhaps also Philip of Macedon and Alexander the Great. So he
knew that. He speaks less about it than Plato does, but he surely knew that. The sophists
were in a sense such people.
Same Student: Yet how does a scheme of the soul such as he has over here, how does
that take into account the possibility of perversion of reason? Because if reason speaks to
the passions and persuades the passions, might not a perverted man’s reason counsel the
passions along quite a—
LS: Sure. There is no doubt about that, that it could.
Same Student: But then ethics has no meaning apart from right reason.
LS: Yes, but reason can of course be perverted, and it is perverted when it is in the
service of something irrational. For example, someone’s desire for glory, for making a
splash in the world, may of course pervert his reason very easily.
Same Student: So ethics is meaningless unless understood in the context of right reason?
LS: Yes, sure. Reason can be perverted, there is no doubt about that. But what Aristotle
has in mind [is] that reason in its highest form, theoretical reason, in the case of someone

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

141

who really understands it, it will not be perverted—I mean someone who has truly tasted
it. Someone may have seen that it gives a man great advantages over others if certain
parts of his intellectual faculties are developed, but then he would of course only think of
the advantages which he derives from his theoretic training and not follow the inner
demands of the theoretical man itself. No, I think Aristotle would say that the perversion
is possible only in [a] more or less imperfectly theoretical man.
Plato seems to have held the same view, because such a man like Protagoras, for
example, when you read the dialogue Protagoras, surely he had a good mind, but when
you observe him in this dialogue, you see the main concern 9 is to make a very good
impression. And that is of course fatal: when you cease to be “objective” and above all
become concerned with yourself, that is ruinous. Even if it has a more amiable form of
shyness—that a man is concerned with himself, that he might embarrass others by
speaking up—even that is bad although it is amiable, whereas the other is not amiable.
Does that make sense?
Same Student: Yes, sir.
LS: So the full dedication to the truth: that’s the point for both Plato and Aristotle. Mr.
Strunsky?
Mr. Strunsky: But Aristotle says that all men by nature desire to know, the highest part
of their reason, but that’s truly not a desire that stems from this middle part of the soul.
LS: Oh, no. The most simple and crude form is curiosity, ordinary curiosity. There are
people, when they see something happens on the road (let’s say a bicycle doesn’t
function),10 they stand and stare at it and find it very interesting. And everything which is
out of the ordinary attracts our attention; I mean, good or bad, high or low, it doesn’t
make any difference. But even that, that we we want to see: that we are interested in the
novel as novel is something which distinguishes us from the brutes. And Aristotle already
tries to show that if we follow the inner logic, if I may say so, of this simple curiosity, we
are eventually led to the highest form of human activity, namely, to the highest form of
the desire for knowledge, which has no longer anything to do with curiosity. But
nevertheless, there is some kinship between the two. Yes?
Student: But in terms of this tripartite theme of the soul, would one say that the activity
of the highest part simply by itself is curiosity leading to knowledge, or is it some desire
as well?
LS: Yes, well, that is a very deep question, of which Aristotle says very little: what the
relation of desire and knowledge altogether is. Is there not a desire presupposed or
inherent in knowledge, insofar as knowledge is acquired on the basis of a previous desire
for knowledge? Of course he assumed that, as the first sentence of the Metaphysics
shows.xxii And in Plato the same question is raised: the relation, in Platonic language, of
xxii

“All men by nature desire to know” (pantes anthrōpoi tou eidenai oregontai physei),
Metaphysics 980a21.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

142

erōs to knowledge or science. But that is not the theme with which Aristotle’s Ethics is
concerned.
There is one point which we must not forget. Here we have heard, I believe for the first
time, the word ēthikaxxiii in Aristotle’s work. And this is the first ethics in existence. Now
ethics is derived from ēthos, a word now very common in sociology, among other
disciplines. Ēthos means character, and the primary subject of the Ethics is character, i.e.,
good and bad character, noble and base character. And since there are a variety of such
characters, we should rather use the plural: noble and base characters. Now Mr Findlay?
Mr. Findlay: At the very end, Aristotle reconsiders . . . the possibility that the rational
part of the soul is really divided into two parts, and I wonder what the significance of that
would be, especially in comparison with Plato’s scheme of the soul. Is that closer to
Plato’s scheme of the soul?
LS: Which one?
Mr. Findlay: The second possibility, that the appetitive part of the soul is considered to
be rational, rather than simply akin to it.
LS: I could not answer your question. It is a sensible question, but I could not answer it,
because the relation of the appetitive and the cognitive is very complex in Plato, for the
reason I indicated.
Mr. Findlay: Well, can I ask a slightly different question, then?
LS: Yes.
Mr. Findlay: In what sense does thymos play a role here in this passage?
LS: None at all.
Mr. Findlay: None at all?
LS: No. He will speak later on, very shortly afterward, of the distinction between the
desire, the appetitive, and the spirited parts, or the irascible part as Aristotle would call it.
He speaks of it. But the distinction between these lower parts and the rational part is
much more important for both Aristotle and Plato than the distinction between the
irascible and the appetitive or concupiscible. Did I make myself clear? I mean, the
distinction between the irascible or spirited part and the concupiscible or appetitive part is
less important—I repeat that—for both Plato and Aristotle than the distinction between
both on the one hand, and the rational part on the other.

xxiii

1103a5.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

143

Mr. Findlay: Well, it seems that this possibility here that is just mentioned is precisely
the possibility which makes the distinction altogether unclear again, insofar as the
appetitive part might be considered to be rational, strictly speaking rational.
LS: It is not strictly speaking rational. I mean, if you use it in this sense, then both Plato
and Aristotle would say [it is] without the light of the intellect. They both need the light
of the intellect in every form, on every level. And to that extent clearly the appetitive or
spirited is below the intellectual.
Mr. Findlay: But it seems here that the implication is that the two are always together in
man, in any event.
LS: Yes, but the question is: how are they together on the highest level? I mean, in the
case of moral virtues that has been sufficiently illustrated and will become very clear in
the sequel. But the question is: how is it on the highest level? What is the relation
between the orexis—the desire for knowledge, the erōs for wisdom—and the insight as
insight? Do they not mutually fructify each other, as it were? That is a question which is
harder to answer.
So then we have now completed our joint study of the first book, and I think without
further ceremony we will turn to book 2.
Reader:
Virtue being, as we have seen, of two kinds, intellectual and moral, intellectual virtue is
for the most part both produced and increased by instruction, and therefore requires
experience and time; whereas moral or ethical virtue is the product of habit (ethos) and
has indeed derived its name, with a slight variation of form, from that word.
LS: Now this is Aristotle’s etymology, which seems to be correct: that ēthos (long e, t-ho-s) comes from the Greek word ethos (short e, t-h-o-s), and ethos means habituation.
Ēthos is something which comes about through habituation, and therefore of course
through time. Yet Aristotle says the intellectual or dianoetic virtues need experience and
time. Does ethical virtue not need these? I think what Aristotle means is this: even the
intellectual virtues need experience and time in order to be acquired; all the more so,
where it is quite obvious, the ethical virtues. We have read a remark to the effect that
young people are not able to act perfectly because of their youth, which means time and
experience are needed for acquiring ethical virtue. Does he translate “moral,” or
“ethical”?
Reader: Yes.
LS: I see. Then that is of course very confusing, because “moral” is simply the Latin
word, the Latin translation for “ethical.” There is no distinction. I think I mentioned
before the present-day distinction used in this country between the unethical pharmacist
and the immoral woman. That is present-day American language, not original. Both

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

144

would be called “unethical” by the Greeks and “immoral” by the Latins, and I think also
by English-speaking people in former times. Yes?
Reader:
And therefore it is clear that none of the moral virtues is engendered in us by nature, for
nothing existing by naturexxiv can be altered by habit. For instance, it is the nature of a
stone to move downwards, and it cannot be trained to move upwards, even though you
should try to train it to do so by throwing it up into the air ten thousand times; nor can fire
be trained to move downwards, nor can anything else that naturally behaves in one way
be trained into a habit of behaving in another way. The virtues therefore— (1103a14-24)
LS: Now let us first understand that, because it is not quite clear. Because ethical virtues
arise through habituation, they are not in us by nature. And the reason is this: in the
emergence of ethical virtue, we become habituated to act differently than we did before.
But what is natural cannot be changed by habituation; therefore the ethical virtues and
their bases are not simply natural. Yes?
Reader:
The virtues therefore are engendered in us neither by nature nor yet against nature; xxv
nature gives us the capacity to receive them, and this capacity is brought to maturity by
habit.
LS: “True perfection” would perhaps be a more literal translation. Now how does
Aristotle know that the ethical virtues are not against nature? After all, why [is it] you
cannot change the falling of the stone? There are not other natural things which can be
affected by habituation. And why does Aristotle know that the ethical virtues are not
against nature, that violence is done to us? There are many doctrines, especially in our
time, which regard at least some of the moral virtues as against nature. And there is a
book by Freud about civilization. What is the full title?
Student: Civilization and Its Discontents.
LS: Yes, it is almost suggested that civilization is against nature. Now how does Aristotle
know that this is not the case? Answer: because he knows that the moral virtues complete
man, perfect man. Against nature means against the grain, and it is not against our grain
that we should be moderate, just, brave, etc. We possess by nature the ability to acquire
moral virtue. We do not possess by nature the power to act virtuously; this power must be
acquired. Man has a certain latitude or flexibility which is as natural to him as fixedness
is, say, to the stone. You cannot transform a beagle puppy into a St. Bernard puppy, but
you can make it housebroken. And that is still more true on the human level. Yes?
Reader:
Moreover, the faculties given us by nature are bestowed on us first in a potential form;
we exhibit their actual exercise afterwards. This is clearly so with our senses: we did not
xxiv
xxv

In Rackham’s translation: “no natural property.”
In Rackham’s translation: “in violation of nature.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

145

acquire the faculty of sight or hearing by repeatedly seeing or repeatedly listening, but the
other way about—because we had the senses we began to use them, we did not get them
by using them. The virtues on the other hand we acquire by first having actually practised
them, just as we do the other arts.
LS: Say “the arts.” That is I think a slight misunderstanding of the Greek word.
Reader:
We learn an art or craft by doing the things that we shall have to do when we have learnt
it: for instance, men become builders by building houses, harpers by playing on the harp.
Similarly we become just by doing just acts, moderate by doing moderate acts,xxvi brave
by doing brave acts. (1103a23-b2)
LS: Now stop. Here Aristotle gives a second reason. One must always watch that, and the
word which he normally uses is in Greek the word eti, which we can translate by
“furthermore” or “besides.” I would translate it always in the same way in order not to
create the impression that there is a variety in Aristotle which is not there. And that is
characteristic of Aristotle: furthermore, furthermore, furthermore. Look around: here that
proves this, here is something that proves it, here something that proves it. That is so
characteristic of Aristotle, more than of him than of any other philosopher.
Now in the things which we have by nature, the potency precedes the act, if we use the
highfalutin’ language of metaphysics. For example, we have the capacity to see before
we see; we have the capacity to hear before we actually hear. In the other things which
we do not have by nature, namely, the virtues on the one hand and the arts on the other,
the acts precede the potency. This is a paradoxical statement but perfectly in accordance
with observed fact, as we can see. Take a simple art, shoemaking. The apprentice, in the
moment he becomes an apprentice, simply cannot make shoes, and he acquires the
capacity to make shoes through his apprenticeship. He acquires the potency by making
shoes, of course first in a very subordinate manner: he will probably have to sweep, clean
the workshop, and [do] things which are only very indirectly related to the making of
shoes. But then gradually he will also do some things more closely related to the center of
shoemaking, and eventually he will have learned to make shoes. But he did make shoes
in different degrees. He made shoes and contributed to the making of shoes before even
he had acquired the capacity.
And here is the crucial importance of the term used by Aristotle here. The “activities” as,
I believe, he translates; in Greek, energeiai. The activities. You see, we have a certain
general notion of activities or motions without making this fundamental distinction by
which the Aristotelian teaching stands and falls: the completed activity, say, the actual
making of shoes as distinguished from the acquisition of that capacity, which is a
becoming, a coming-into-being. The actual shoemaking is not a coming-into-being; it is a
coming-into-being of the shoe, but not a coming-into-being of the activity of making
shoes. Is this clear? Everything depends on that. Now if we apply this to moral virtue,
xxvi

In Rackham’s translation: “temperate by doing temperate acts.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

146

ethical virtue, what the apprentices do, I mean young people, is not yet moral but it is an
acquisition of morality, so that they later on will act morally.
There is a little point to which I should draw your attention, and that is when he speaks
here: “The virtues we acquire by having practiced them previously, just as we do in the
arts, as men do in the arts. What we must do after having learned this, we learn by doing
it, as men become housebuilders by housebuilding, and cithara players by playing the
cithara. In the same way, by doing just things, we become just.” xxvii When he speaks of
justice, he uses “we.” When he speaks of housebuilding, he says “they,” because
Aristotle himself would never think of becoming a housebuilder but [would think] very
much of becoming just. This is a little but characteristic point. Yes. Aristotle now does
not give an additional reason, but he gives an additional illustration of the same thing in
the sequel. Yes?
Reader:
This truth is attested by the experience of cities: xxviii lawgivers make the citizens good by
training them in habits of right action—this is the aim of all legislation, and if it fails to
do this it is a failure; this is what distinguishes a good regime xxix from a bad one.
(1103b2-6)
LS: Yes, now that is a sign that virtue comes through habituation. Every legislator thinks
in terms of such a habituation, and [Aristotle] therefore knows that it is unlikely that all
legislators are radically mistaken regarding the most fundamental part of their craft. Here
he makes a distinction between, or refers to a distinction between legislation and regime.
This is also something crucial for Aristotle, although he does not speak of it here. That is
one of the themes, in a way the most important theme of the Politics. For Aristotle laws,
codes, are never the fundamental political fact. All codes are the work of a legislator. The
legislator doesn’t have to be merely an individual; it can also be a group. But the
legislator, the man or body of men who can make and unmake the laws, are for this
reason not subject to the laws qua legislators. They will be subject to the laws insofar as
they are citizens. That is another matter.
Now the legislative activity, the activity which causes the laws, which is prior to the laws,
is nevertheless not an undetermined sovereign power in the sense of Hobbes, but it
depends on the character of the ruling part of the society. So in other words, to take the
simplest examples, a legislator or legislative body will be either democratic or oligarchic
or tyrannical or what have you, and therefore the laws will be either democratic or
oligarchic or tyrannical. This, the character of the regime, accounts for the character of
the laws which every regime sets up with a view to what it regards as most important. It
does not necessarily mean that every regime sets up the laws with a view to its own
interest, although it may mean that. But the most important point is that it sets up the laws
with a view to what it regards as the highest and most authoritative. Aristotle refers to
this point here in passing. In one sense it is easy for us to understand that, because the
xxvii

Strauss translates 1103a31-b1.
In Rackham’s translation: “states.”
xxix
In Rackham’s translation: “form of constitution.”
xxviii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

147

whole notion of rule of law has no longer the evidence which it possessed in former
times, because we are more aware than the nineteenth century was that rule of laws
should mean rule of good or just laws. And therefore the rule of law simply is not—one
can still make a case for the rule of laws as laws, but it is unsatisfactory if it is not a case
for good or just laws. I think we sense this more strongly than people did prior to the First
World War. Yes, now let us now go on.
Reader:
Again, the actions from or through which any virtue—
LS: You see, what he translates here by “again” is the same Greek word: “furthermore,”
eti, and which for us, keep in mind, you see is really an enumeration of reasons. And it is
of some importance to see that in order to see what is the context in which a given
statement appears. A statement might be particularly evident and striking, and yet is not
necessarily the purpose for which the whole thing is made but only a context. In order to
establish what the context is, we must observe this partition. Now begin again, Mr.
Pangle.
Reader:
Again, the actions from or through which any virtue is produced are the same as those
through which it also is destroyed—just as is the case with skill in the arts, for both the
good harpers and the bad ones are produced by harping, and similarly with builders and
all the other craftsmen: as you will become a good builder from building well, so you will
become a bad one from building badly.
LS: He uses the third person here. You see, the translator is not aware of the niceties of
Aristotle’s thought. Yes?
Reader:
Were this not so, there would be no need for teachers of the arts, but everybody would be
born a good or bad craftsman as the case might be. The same then is true of the virtues. It
is by taking part in transactions with our fellow-men that some of us become just—
(1103b6-15)
LS: “We” now again. Yes?
Reader:
and others unjust; by acting in dangerous situations and forming a habit of fear or of
confidence we become courageous or cowardly. And the same holds good of our
dispositions with regard to the appetites, and anger; some men become moderate xxx and
gentle, others profligate and irascible, by actually comporting themselves in one way or
the other in relation to those passions. In a word, our moral dispositions are formed as a
result of the corresponding activities.

xxx

In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

148

LS: Yes. Let us stop here. Now here he gives the third reason why virtue does not arise
by nature. That is still the point. If it were to arise by nature, then all men would become
either good or bad, or middling, whatever the case may be. But since they become either
good or bad or middling, some good, some bad, some middling, this is not simply natural.
Aristotle disregards here entirely a complication which is caused by the fact that there are
what he calls later on natural virtues, meaning that some men are born with a disposition
toward courage, and others with a disposition toward cowardice and so on. But that is too
complicated for this still introductory consideration. Yes?
Reader:
Hence it is incumbent upon us to control the character of our activities—
LS: “To make the activities, activities of a certain kind.” He means, of course, of a good
kind. Yes?
Reader:
since on the quality of these depends the quality of our dispositions. It is therefore not of
small moment whether we are trained from childhood in one set of habits or another; on
the contrary it is of very great, or rather of supreme, importance. (1103b15-25)
LS: Everything depends on the quality of the activities we engage in from our very
childhood, from our earliest childhood on. That is another final conclusion from the fact
that virtue arises through habituation. Therefore let us be watchful from the very
beginning how we habituate our children or ourselves. That’s necessary . . . Good. Now
is there any point needing discussion, in your opinion? If this is not the case, then we—
oh, Mr. Phillip?
Mr. Phillip: I think there is a difficulty which Aristotle recognizes and perhaps even
allows for, in that not everyone who does what appears to be the best action is necessarily
just, but if you were being trained or habituated in justice, I suppose Aristotle would
consider that outwardly just act to be the kind of act that would lead him to the higher or
truer justice.
LS: Yes. Yes, that’s what he means. That is what he will make clear to the meanest
capacity in the sequel, because it is very explicit here, this matter. But he takes his time;
he goes step by step. Surely, say, what a small child does cannot be described as a
perfectly virtuous act, and even many acts of mature human beings cannot be described
as perfectly virtuous but only as externally virtuous, but they are as it were the entrance
or the antechamber of the virtuous acts proper.
Same Student: In a certain sense, then, the capacity does precede the actual exercise of
it.
LS: No, at a certain moment there is a changeover from the coming-into-being to the
actual practice, to the energeia. Let us wait, he will take some time. Mr. . . . ?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

149

Student: When Aristotle says that none of the things that are by nature can be habituated
otherwise, is that supposed to be simply true, or is that just kind of a general
conclusion? I think, for example, of cases like certain religious ascetics [who] always go
around on their hands and knees, and they presumably become used to this. Yet does that
mean that walking upright isn’t natural?
LS: But they do not deny and do not mean to deny that man is meant for upright walking.
Or what precisely do you mean?
Same Student: Well, as Aristotle states it, if you took that one formulation completely
seriously, that would mean that any kind of behavior which could be possibly altered
through habit couldn’t be natural.
LS: No, well, there are very similar examples: someone tries to reduce his food input to
the barest minimum. You couldn’t say that this bare minimum is the only natural thing; at
least Aristotle would not say that. It is a general statement. And you take the most simple
cases, like—from his point of view, like those of the elements: heavy stones or light ones.
And they cannot be changed by habituation. Subhuman; subliving . . . Yes?
Student: . . .
LS: I did not quite understand you, and that is partly due to the fact that my hearing is not
perfect. Now did you refer to the natural virtues?
Same Student: No. The moral virtues.
LS: Then I misunderstood you.
Same Student: No, to the moral virtues as opposed to the intellectual virtues. That is, the
man who is intellectually virtuous need not necessarily be morally virtuous. But on the
other hand, how would a man’s intellectual virtues also relate to his excellence in action
if he is not morally virtuous?
LS: Well, in action he has to be morally virtuous, because that is not the sphere of the
intellectual activity, of the intellectual virtues. But the other way around: Aristotle does
not speak explicitly about this whole question. That is also another characteristic of
Aristotle. Aristotle can be, and is most of the time, very clear and very explicit. And yet
you see at once, if you look at an account of the medieval discussions of which
interpretation of Aristotle is correct—say, the Thomistic or the Averroistic one—and if
you look up then the Aristotelian passages, there are a few pages in all his works on
which everything else depends, and they are very short and very laconic. There is one
example in this book of special importance which we shall discuss later, and that is one
page on natural right. That’s all. It is one of the most difficult passages in the whole book.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

150

Now similarly, the question: is moral virtue a prerequisite of intellectual virtue? You do
not find an unambiguous statement of Aristotle either affirming or denying it. That is the
difficulty. And so we have to use our own minds in order to solve it. And when he speaks
at the end of the book, where he speaks about about the superiority of the theoretical life
to the practical life, he says of the gods, who are presumed by him to be of course
superior to man, superhuman, they don’t need moral virtues, and they are of course
beings capable of contemplation. For example, they don’t need justice. They are not just
because they don’t need justice, because they don’t make any transactions, or they have
no desires for goods which cannot be shared. And the same: they have no courage, not
because they are cowards but because they are not concerned with self-preservation, and
so on and so on. So that is a very long question, and perhaps we find some evidence
while we go which permits us to decide it. Thomas Aquinas, who knew Aristotle very
well, simply teaches that the intellectual virtues . . . xxxi moral virtues, with one exception,
and that is practical wisdom. Practical wisdom, prudence; phronēsis in Greek. That
cannot be acquired without the simultaneous acquisition of moral virtue. But this is what
Aristotle himself says in the sixth book of the Ethics. But the other things, wisdom
especially, theoretical wisdom, can be acquired without moral virtue. Well, common
sense seems to speak for it up to a point. A man can be a very great thinker or scholar, it
seems, without having moral virtue. But in the moment we say that, we say: is that really
true? A specialist, of course—I mean, that is possible, a man may have a very sharp
mathematical mind and so, and can be wholly irresponsible in his [judgment] . . . xxxii an
intellectual virtue much lower than theoretical wisdom, which are quite strange for us,
and where we have to make a certain effort to see what Aristotle means. I suggest that we
postpone discussion of this question. Yes?
Student: Does Aristotle distinguish between the lawgiver, someone who promulgates—
the first lawgiver, from the political man, the legislator who works day by day?
LS: . . .xxxiii especially by Thomas Aquinas, and by his successors. And the point is, they
distinguish therefore between practical science and—I think they called them
theoretically practical, meaning practically removed. The science of legislation is
practiced by the actual legislator, but there is a science of legislation taught by a teacher
of legislators, who is himself not necessarily a legislator. This would be on a higher level.
Now here perhaps we can discuss this, for example, for one moment. The legislator must
be a man of great integrity, otherwise he will be swayed by sympathies or antipathies
which make him partial, and he must not be bribable and so on and so on. But what about
the teacher of legislators? In his case, it is not so necessary, because he is not exposed
himself to the temptations to which the legislator is exposed. This is certainly relevant to
the question you raised. Now shall we read a bit more?
Reader:

xxxi

There is a gap in the tape here of several seconds.
The tape was changed at this point.
xxxiii
Several words here are inaudible.
xxxii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

151

As then our present study, is not for the sake of observing, like the othersxxxiv (for we are
not investigating virtue for the sake of knowing what it is, but in order that we may
become good, without which result our investigation would be of no use), we have
consequently to carry our enquiry into the region of conduct, and to ask how we are to act
rightly. (1103b26-30)
LS: Now let us stop here for one moment. “The present inquiry is not for the sake of
theōria, of contemplation, as the other pursuits are,” say, of the mathematician, of the
physicist and so on. “For we make our inquiry not in order to know what is virtue, but so
that we will become good. For if this were not the result of our inquiry, our inquiry would
be useless.” Yes. Now this is directed against the Socratic view, at least against the way
in which the Socratic view is frequently presented, and in particular presented by
Aristotle himself. I will give you one example from another version of the Ethics, called
the Eudemian Ethics, 1216b3: “Now accordingly Socrates thought that the end is to get to
know virtue, and he pursued—and he investigated what is justice, and what is courage,
and every other part of virtue. And this was reasonable for him, since he thought that all
virtues are forms of knowledge, so that knowing justice and being just [must go together.
For as soon as we have learned geometry, and architecture],xxxv we are architects and
geometricians.”xxxvi And correspondingly, as soon as we know what virtue is, we are
virtuous. Now this is at least the way in which Socrates appeared to quite a few men,
Aristotle [being] one of them. And this is what Aristotle denies. And therefore we do not
become virtuous by knowing what virtue is. Here Aristotle simply says what common
sense dictates, and the paradoxical statement is not Aristotle’s but Socrates’s. What
Socrates meant by it, that’s a long question for which we don’t have the time here, but it
is sufficient to make this observation. But since this is the case, since we study virtue not
for the sake of knowledge but for the sake of becoming virtuous, therefore we must first
turn above all to the actions and see how these actions have to be performed, that is the
point, whereas Socrates was apparently concerned much more with the definition of
justice and the other virtues than with doing the actions. Yes?
Reader:
since our actions, as we have said, determine the quality of our dispositions.
Now to act in conformity with right principle is common ground, and may be assumed as
the basis of our discussion. (We shall speak about this later, and consider both what right
principle is and its relation to the other virtues.) xxxvii

xxxiv

In Rackham’s translation: “our present study, unlike the other branches of philosophy, has a
practical aim.”
xxxv
There is a gap in the tape at this point.
xxxvi
Strauss’s translation of Eudemian Ethics 1216b2-9.
xxxvii
In Rackham’s translation: “the formula ‘to act in conformity with right principle’ is common
ground, and may be assumed as the basis of our discussion. (We shall speak about this formula
later, and consider both the definition of right principle and its relation to the other virtues.)”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

152

But let it be accepted to begin with that the whole discussion of conduct xxxviii is bound to
be an outline only and not exact,xxxix in accordance with the rule we laid down at the
beginning, that discussions xl must only be required to correspond to their subject matter;
and matters of conduct and expediency have nothing fixed or invariable about them, any
more than have matters of health. (1103b30-4a5)
LS: Let us stop here, and I think we must stop here altogether. Now he will then turn to
the actions. How should we act, how must we act in order to become good or to remain
good? Now he says the actions by which we become good must be kata ton orthon logon,
“according to the right reason,” if we translate it traditionally; “according to right
reason,” which is better than his translation. One could slightly improve on it, saying
“according to right reasoning.” All human actions, in order to be good, must be in
accordance with some reason, with some account to be given, explicit or implicit. One
can even say [that] all bad actions also have some reason. The bad actions are justified by
an incorrect reasoning; the good actions are justified by a correct reasoning. But there is
always some reasoning, explicit or implicit, present.
Now there is a correct reasoning of course also in other fields. For example, the reasoning
which a carpenter has when he tells you why he made the chair in this manner and not in
that. The characteristic of the correct account regarding objects of human action is that
there is no stability possible in this sphere. There are no general rules without exceptions,
as little as in the sphere of health, as Aristotle says for the time being. Therefore we must
first see (this is the beginning of the argument) what kind of account can reasonably be
expected of our actions. Can it be given in terms of universal rules, universally valid
rules, or is the most that can be expected an account in terms of general rules which admit
of exceptions? And the proof of the case for its exception is not given here now. We will
take this up next time.
Aristotle continues this statement about the limited certainty we can expect in this sphere,
and yet he goes on, nevertheless, we must try to spell out what can be said about how
virtue is acquired in general terms. And the first thing which strikes him and which leads
soon to the core of his view of virtue is that we distinguish in our actions excessive
actions, deficient actions, and actions which are in the mean. And the actions in the mean
are generally speaking the correct ones, and that leads then eventually to the definition of
virtue as a mean between two faulty extremes.
You have some difficulty in hearing?
Student: No . . .
LS: That’s fine. So then we will then continue this on Wednesday. There was someone
else who wanted to hand in a paper today.

xxxviii

In Rackham’s translation: “the whole theory of conduct.”
In Rackham’s translation: “not an exact system.”
xl
In Rackham’s translation: “philosophical theories.”
xxxix

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 9

1

Deleted “us.”
Moved “is.”
3
Deleted “that which makes.”
4
Deleted “being.”
5
Deleted “but.”
6
Deleted “wrong.”
7
Deleted “our.”
8
Deleted “analogies.”
9
Moved “with him.”
10
Deleted “and.”
2

153

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

154

Session 10: March 13, 1968
Leo Strauss:i Now I have two papers here from last time. Mr. . . . ? Is he here? . . . there
are a few points. You say, “Aristotle here has established that the main concern of
politics is to secure the happiness of man.” That is not quite correct. To what extent is it
correct, and to what extent is it incorrect?
Student: Well, he establishes that the end of politics is to secure the good of man or to
foster the good of man.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: I am going one step beyond, perhaps.
LS: Yes. Exactly. What is the point where Aristotle stops and there you go beyond him?
Same Student: A man who secures his happiness by having activities according to
rational principle and politics will . . . and this will bring about his own good. Politics
helps, I think, I understand politics has as an end to help man toward—
LS: Toward, yes, but the precise point, I think, is this, that Aristotle says on the one hand
that the political art is the highest art, and the highest art is devoted to the highest human
good, and the highest human good is happiness. And from this one is entitled to conclude
that it is the task of the political man (the statesman, the legislator) to make the citizens
happy. But Aristotle does not say that. Aristotle says only that the task of the statesman
[is] to make the citizens good citizens, good men, and doers of noble deeds, but he does
not explicitly say that the statesman’s function is to make the citizens happy, a statement
which Xenophon makes. I read to you, I think, that passage from the Memorabilia, book
3, chapter 2.
Now there is one more point. “If Aristotle criticizes Plato on the grounds that Plato’s idea
of the absolute good is of no use to the practitioner, I do not yet know of what use the
definition of the end of politics given by Aristotle as being the good of man, an activity of
the soul in conformity with excellence or virtue can be for a political thinker or
practitioner in search of the best regime for his polis.” Well, what could Aristotle reply to
you?
Same Student: That I have to go and keep reading.
LS: Exactly. Because he has only—but Aristotle makes here only the point, in the
beginning as we have read it hitherto, that the statesman, or politician, or legislator has to
do with the human good and not with the good in the Platonic sense, which you call the
absolute good. And then he gives some illustrations: what would be the use for a
i

The session begins with Strauss’s remarks about the course requirements, which have been
omitted.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

155

carpenter or a shoemaker to have the idea of the good if he wants to make good shoes?
He obviously needs a kind of knowledge which does not include knowledge of the idea
of the good.
Same Student: Yes, I had said that only . . . That seems to be the very optimum [for] the
shoemaker. The political thinker or practitioner who wants to achieve the best regime for
his polis may be very much able [to do this] by having some kind of absolute good or the
kind of ideas that Plato posited, to which he would like to approximate, which he would
like to work for . . . to change the nature of the political organization, of his polis, to try
to get closer to that.
LS: Yes, I mean, that is surely absent from Aristotle, one can say, although it is not very
powerfully present in Plato. The notion of a radical change is absent from Aristotle.
Aristotle thinks that no fundamental change in human conditions can reasonably be
expected. Plato, by his notion of the idea of the good and by his Republic and his radical
statement that philosophers must become kings, seems to be much more radical in the
modern sense of the term. If you mean that, you are perfectly correct.
Same Student: That is what I meant . . . could . . .
LS: And therefore Plato has of course had a more direct influence on modern thinking
than Aristotle did.
Same Student: . . . Perhaps this leads to a difference . . . conservative so-called
philosophy or more liberal or revolutionary—
LS: Yes, it could lead to that but, as a matter of fact, it did not lead to it in premodern
times. But it was, one can say, a transformation of Plato’s political philosophy rather than
of Aristotle’s which led to the modern revolutionary movements. That one can say. Will
you pass this on, please?
Is Mr. . . . here now? Well, I deplore that, his absence. His statement is very challenging,
and I would like to have his help in discussing that. Very briefly, what Mr. . . . suggests is
that one should replace the Aristotelian duality of virtue and happiness or of happiness
and virtue by the duality of motivation and fulfillment, fulfillment taking the place of
happiness and motivation taking the place of virtue. And it would be worth our while to
discuss that, because there are obviously very different notions involved, very different
presuppositions. It would be important to discuss that. What is striking when one speaks
of fulfillment and motivation is that, at first glance at least, there seems to be no provision
made for goodness. A man may find his fulfillment in quite incredible and impossible
things, and yet he is motivated toward it and he finds fulfillment in getting whatever he
desires. So I suppose, but I do not know, that Mr. . . . means he would not call [it] a
fulfillment [if it] is a fulfillment in bad things, and he would not speak of motivation if
the motivation is a motivation toward bad things. But he has not given me any certainty
by what he says about that. And also, the terms which he uses, motivation and
fulfillment, while they are easily intelligible today (I mean, in a vague way, because they

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

156

are so commonly used), what is implied in these terms is by no means on the surface and
would have to be brought out by a proper analysis. He gives an example, I think, of what
he understands by a properly motivated man. He says: could it be possible to be
successfully motivated and still not be happy in Aristotle’s sense? In other words, he
refers here to the difficulty we observed in Aristotle that a man may be a man of great
excellence and yet live in great misery: Priam.
“Experience seems to provide a positive answer to this question. Intense
opposition to one’s society can produce motivation of most overwhelming power.
Consider for example a poet intensely striving for what he considers perfection in
his work, even though society scorns or actively opposes his efforts, who is
willing to suffer and endure severe deprivation or even imprisonment in the name
of his motivation. In such [a] case, the individuals, although perhaps engaged in
highly artificial and abstract endeavors, achieve great fulfillment through their
motivation, else they would not put themselves in positions in which they must
inevitably suffer hardships and unhappiness. Happiness therefore is not the only
possible goal for the motivation of civilized man.”
Now what shall we say about this argument? The fact that someone opposes his society
and suffers for his opposition severely was not totally unknown to Aristotle, and the
simple proof of course is Socrates: Socrates was condemned to death for his
disagreement with the city of Athens. Was Socrates unhappy or not happy by virtue of his
condemnation? How would you answer this question? He was not unhappy.
Student: He was not unhappy.
LS: How could you prove it?
Same Student: Well, I’d say first that, well, looking at the reasons that he gives for not
running away or escaping exile, that actually his real obligation to Athens is—well, you
look both at the Apology and the Crito.
LS: Yes. That is what I suggested. Let us look at the evidence, what we know about. But
the most important evidence, I believe, is how he behaved on his last day, in the Phaedo,
when the man who describes Socrates’s last day says: “The man was happy,” eudaimōn.
You know, because he knew that he had to die but he didn’t wish to spoil the last day for
himself and his friends by moaning, and so they had a very exciting philosophic
discussion.
Student: He kicks Xanthippe out.
LS: Yes, because Xanthippe would have moaned too much. So that is the situation.
Whether he was sufficiently considerate of his nearest and dearest is a long question, but
Aristotle hasn’t said hitherto [that] you have to be extremely considerate. You know?
That is another point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

157

But there is some other evidence regarding this fact, and since Mr. . . . speaks of poets:
Now were poets persecuted in classical antiquity?
Student: Empedocles.
LS: Pardon?
Student: Empedocles.
LS: But he was a philosopher. Although he wrote, he presented his philosophic doctrine
in hexameter; that does not make him a poet. Well, there is a discussion of this subject, a
very interesting one, in Aristophanes, who presents Socrates in the Clouds, and there
Socrates is persecuted, you know. The old fellow, Strepsiades, is burning down his think
tank. I think that is a reasonable translation of the Greek word phrontistērion, and it is as
folksy as “think tank” is in present-day language. And then he presents in at least two
plays, the Thesmophoriazusae and the Acharnians, a persecution of a poet, in this case
Euripides—no, not in the Acharnians, in the Frogs. And it appears that the poet,
Euripides, is perfectly capable to escape persecution, because being a poet, he has a much
broader appeal than a fellow like Socrates had. This I mention only in passing.
There is another example, by the way, from the Odyssey already. When Odysseus takes
revenge on the wooers of Penelope, there are two parallel figures: one is a soothsayer,
and the other is a singer. Now the soothsayer he kills, but the singer he has compassion
with and lets him live. So the poets who expose themselves to persecution apparently
were less frequent in antiquity than they are in our age, and it would be important to see
why this has changed. That would be very important. Yes?
Student: How would this idea of fulfillment and motivation relate to the case we talked
of earlier of Priam and his lover and his children? Is there any way to . . . I wasn’t really
clear about how Priam could be happy in the misery at the killing of all of his children.
LS: No one said that.
Same Student: Right, right. Is there any way that this could relate to this more fully by
the concept of fulfillment being a little larger than happiness in this sense? He could be,
although it may sound ludicrous, fulfilled in the sense, you know, in this tragic defeat.
LS: Well, I suppose that one would have to admit. I do not know whether this covers the
ground of which you spoke. I think one would have to—Mr. . . . would have to admit, I
believe, that there are situations in which a fulfillment is impossible. Think of a highly
motivated Russian poet in the thirties or forties in Russia under Stalin. Even before he
could publish a single poem, and perhaps even before he could finish it, that institution—
I forgot the name it had under Stalin—would have prevented any fulfillment. But what
was your precise reason why “fulfillment” seems to be a better term than happiness?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

158

Same Student: I didn’t really think it was a better term, but it just seemed in a sense
larger in that it—I mean, based on the idea of motivation and not virtue, using motivation
as kind of a . . . to the end of fulfillment. It seemed to fit this case somewhat more,
although there was just one I thought of right offhand, namely, Priam obviously wasn’t
happy, but it seemed that he would be closer to fulfillment than happiness. I didn’t want
to set it up as better.
LS: If you say that, then he would surely be at least as close to fulfillment prior to the
outbreak of the Trojan War. Then he was the highly respected and beloved ruler of the
Trojans. And this suffered somewhat from the terrible blunder his son Paris made by
bringing over Helen, you know, and all the consequences of this action.
That is a very sensible question to say: how come that a young man like Mr. . . . and you
apparently also, is more attracted by the concept of fulfillment, motivation, than by
happiness and virtue? I believe one would have to consider here Kant very much, where
happiness simply takes a very secondary role compared with fulfillment of duty, and
therefore the only thing which counts for the estimation of a human being is whether he
fulfills or shirks his duty. And the poet, as presented by Mr. . . ., is a man who fulfills his
duty and disregards completely or almost completely the harsh and unpleasant
consequence of doing that. But there is of course this difference, because for Kant there
are universally valid rules of goodness, of moral action: the moral law. And Mr. . . . does
not have in mind the one moral law. I suppose what he thinks rather is there is a variety
of causes, let us assume of good causes: a variety of good causes which differ from
situation to situation and which have only something formal in common: that they are
good causes.
Another term used frequently now is “project.” One becomes an authentic human
being—they do no longer speak of good or bad [but of] an authentic man in
contradistinction to an inauthentic man—by dedicating oneself to a project which
originates entirely in oneself and is therefore a full expression of this particular individual
in what he is. These are, I believe, some of the notions behind Mr. . . . paper. Is there
anyone here, by the way, who knows him, who knows Mr. . . . and who could return this
to him? Pardon. Mr. . . . Oh, he’s a stranger. Good. That may be a recommendation,
for all we know. [Laughter] Now we have begun to read the second chapter of the second
book of of the Nicomachean Ethics. Yes?
Student: Wouldn’t it eliminate a lot of misunderstanding when we speak of motivation
and fulfillment if we just took the words and made them a little bit less highfalutin’ and
just spoke of want or desire and satisfaction?
LS: Ya, sure, but this is obvious—you are perfectly right. But why did Mr. . . . not
choose these simple words?
Same Student: Because this is of course where Aristotle starts off is that lots of people
want different things and then goes on to analyze it beyond that.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

159

LS: Ya, but a desire can also mean a desire for a juicy steak. Yes?
Same Student: . . . desire.
LS: Yes, but obviously what Mr. . . . has in mind when he speaks of motivation and
fulfillment is not having a good dinner, but something higher.
Same Student: Well, now—
LS: No, I’m sure his examples which he gives show that.
Same Student: Yes, but the examples which he gives you characterize as being akin to
duty.
LS: No, I mean, the notion stems from that. You see, what is characteristic—I forgot
perhaps one point. When Kant speaks of duty and duty to the moral law, he understands
by the law a law which I myself have imposed on myself; what he calls “autonomy.” And
therefore the moral law is in a way my work and must originate in myself, otherwise it is
not truly moral; otherwise I obey either God or nature, and therewith shirk the
responsibility for my action, while if it originates entirely in me, I have the full
responsibility for my action. This Kantian moral doctrine is an important ingredient of
what is now known by the name of existentialism, but the difference being that for Kant
it was clear that this law originating in the individual as this individual would always be
the same in all cases, because man’s innermost being is his reason, his rationality, and
what reason says is universally valid and necessary. And this is of course dropped by
existentialism. Yes, Mr. West?
Student: I have a question. At the beginning of chapter 13—
LS: In book 1?
Same Student: Yes. Aristotle says that the aim of the legislator is to make the citizens
good and lawabiding. But you said that the aim of the legislator was to make the citizens
good and doers of noble deeds.
LS: This the author says.
Same Student: Where does he say this?
LS: Earlier in the first part. Ya. Oh, yes.
Same Student: Is doers of noble deeds to be equated with law-abidingness?
LS: No, but that is not so simple. This will come out when he speaks of law in the fifth
book. Aristotle takes here the same position as Plato. The legal and legitimate—however
you translate the word; the Greek word permits both translations—is in a manner the just,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

160

not simply the just, because there can be bad and evil laws, and in this case the just is
different from the legal. But nevertheless, there is in law, in law itself something good.
What people indicate when they speak of law and order is the first requirement. That is
recognized by Plato and Aristotle, but with a great qualification: that is not enough; it
must be good law. And therefore, if the legislator succeeds in making the citizens
obedient to the law, that does not mean that he makes them the doers of noble deeds,
although the law is meant to do that. But in many cases the law does not keep this
promise or fulfill its purpose. You wanted to say something? Good.
Now here in this chapter Aristotle began, as you may remember, [saying] that the present
inquiry is not made for the sake of contemplation, not so that we know what virtue is, as
Socrates did, but rather it serves the purpose that we become good. And we become good
by acting in the proper manner and not by talking, discoursing, and so on, and therefore
Aristotle speaks first of how we become good. Now how is it possible to know how we
can become good without having a previous awareness of what goodness is? How can
you know how a man will become a carpenter if you don’t know in the first place what a
carpenter is, or how a man can become a shepherd if you do not know first what a
shepherd is?
Now Aristotle knows that, of course, and he will take up the question of what goodness,
what virtue is in 1105b29. But here, in order to emphasize this point that the most
important thing is to become good and not to engage in a theoretical speculation about
what goodness is, he discusses first how we become good. Of course he has a previous
notion of what goodness is. But who has not? At least in these olden times, everyone
knew what a decent man or gentleman is, and so there was no—there were different
degrees of clarity, but in a general way there was agreement in that. And Aristotle takes
this up then in the sequel, and the first point he makes (and that is the point at which we
stopped at the end of the last meeting) [is] that what he is going to say, or what anyone
might say on the subject of virtue, cannot be exact. And the simplest explanation of this
would be to say that there is no rule in this field without exception, whereas regarding
triangles, circles, and so on, there are rules without exception. Here in this sphere, there
are not. Yes?
Student: Are the broad outlines, though, exact?
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: Are the broad outlines in science exact?
LS: Ya, the point which he wishes to make first is the inexactness of the whole. And that
there are some things which are universally true here, that can be presumed. Yes. For
example, that courage, say, is a mean between cowardice and overboldness, or however
you call it, or temerity, that is surely universally valid. But he doesn’t tell you what you
should do, especially in a given situation, because what might be cowardice or temerity in
other situations might be the proper thing in a certain situation which no one can predict
in advance. I think we should go on to read in 1104a5.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

161

Reader:
And if this is true of the general discussion ii of ethics—
LS: “Of the general logos.” The general statement, the general definition, will have this
inexactness. Yes? “It is still more true.”
Reader:
still less is exact precision possible in dealing with particular cases of conduct—
LS: So in other words, the statement about moral matters in general is not quite exact: no
general rule without exception. But it is still more so regarding the particulars, particular
cases. Yes?
Reader:
for these come under no science or tradition, iii but the agents themselves have to consider
what is suited to the circumstances on each occasion, just as is the case with the art of
medicine or of navigation. (1104a5-10)
LS: Let us stop here, perhaps. So the general thesis here regarding the particulars—what
is to be done under these and these circumstances—is still less susceptible of exactness.
No case is the same as any other. One must play here by the ear, as we would say, and
therefore we don’t have a science, exact knowledge, here.
He compares to morality the arts of medicine and of sailing. These illustrations are not
chosen haphazardly. They have in common one thing: they are arts which deal with
dangers to life. It is highly hazardous to cross the sea; and medicine, in the more
interesting cases, surely has to do with severe, critical diseases. And this leads to
interesting questions which go beyond the sphere of the physician or the pilot: which man
to save in a plague or in a storm at sea, if the physician or pilot cannot save all? No one
can say in advance what might be reasonable in the circumstances. There are some
general rules: one ought to save the man most valuable to the community. And surely that
is a general rule, but there are obvious difficulties. From Aristotle’s point of view, that
would be the wise man, ya? Or, say, the statesman. But there might be a situation in
which there is a single physician available who would be more urgently needed by the
community than a statesman. And in addition, one of these men to be saved may be a
very unwise man but happens to be the father of the pilot or of the physician. Would it
not be reasonable to permit him to save in the first place his own father rather than the
statesman? This shows the difficulties. It doesn’t have to be his father; if he is the father
of many children, that is an important consideration, whether he should not be saved.
One can state the difficulty involved here by making a distinction, by the following
distinction. You can say in general what is the order of rank of the various activities. Say
from Aristotle’s point of view that thinking, philosophizing, and so on is higher than any
ii
iii

In Rackham’s translation: “theory.”
In Rackham’s translation: “professional tradition.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

162

practical activity, and then the activity of the statesman is higher than that of the garbage
collectors. Ya? And quite a few others. That you can easily say. But the highest or
highest in rank is not the same as the most urgent. A simple practical example: no one
admires another human being for having successfully undergone an appendectomy. I
mean, that is nothing grand. We can congratulate him if he survived, but we do not
admire him, because it was not a virtuous action, an action of human excellence. And yet
it is perfectly true that in a given situation the appendectomy is the most urgent thing for
him to do, and not higher things. So the difference between rank and urgency explains
ultimately why there is this uncertainty in that sphere. And everyone must ultimately
decide on the basis of this situation, on the spot, what is to be preferred. There are no
universal rules, because in some cases it may truly be true that it is more important that
he continues, say, with his study rather than that he undergoes the operation. Such cases
are thinkable. Good. So Aristotle draws this conclusion here in the next line.
Reader:
But although the discussion now proceeding is thus necessarily inexact, we must do our
best to help it out.
LS: So in other words, Aristotle will try to speak about universals, although it is not a
particularly promising thing to do, compared with mathematics especially. Yes?
Reader:
First of all then we have to observe, that such things iv are so constituted by nature as to be
destroyedv by excess and by deficiency—as we see is the case—
LS: “Such things” means the things of importance to morality. Yes?
Reader:
as we see is the case with bodily strength and health (for one is forced to explain what is
invisible by means of visible illustrations). Strength is destroyed both by excessive and
by deficient exercises, and similarly health is destroyed both by too much and by too little
food and drink; while they are produced, increased and preserved by suitable quantities.
(1104a10-18)
LS: “By suitable quantities.” The emphasis is on that, i.e., not too much, not too little.
Yes?
Reader:
The same, therefore, is true of Moderation,vi Courage, and the other virtues. The man
who runs away from everything in fear and never endures anything becomes a coward;
the man who fears nothing whatsoever but encounters everything becomes rash. Similarly
he that indulges in every pleasure and refrains from none turns out a profligate, and he
that shuns all pleasure, as boorish persons do, becomes what may be called insensible.
iv

In Rackham’s translation: “moral qualities.”
In Rackham’s translation: “are so constituted as to be destroyed.”
vi
In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”
v

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

163

Thus Moderationvii and Courage are destroyed by excess and deficiency, and preserved
by the observance of the mean. (1104a18-27)
LS: Yes. Now taking the example of how virtue of the body is achieved through
gymnastics, he says there is a parallel in how the virtue of the soul is achieved. Virtues
come into being by actions which are neither excessive nor deficient. In the case of
gymnastics, I think there is no doubt about this, and everyone will admit it. But Aristotle
says it is also true of the moral things, and he takes the simple example: a man who fears
everything, even a fly, and acts on it, avoids anything which could be a nuisance, will
become a coward, without any doubt. And another man who braves every danger without
any distinction of dangers will become rash. Yes?
Student: Aristotle seems to make the distinction in the case of the bodily and in the case
of bodily health: it’s not only preserved but also produced and increased by moderation,
but he only says with respect to moderation and courage that it is preserved. He doesn’t—
LS: Let me see. Where is that?
Same Student: I may be wrong.
LS: The man who flees from everything and fears it, and doesn’t undergo any danger,
becomes a coward. Is that the passage you mean?
Same Student: Well, in other words—yes, well, and also the concluding passage at 26.
In other words, it’s either preserved or destroyed by moderation on the one hand, or
excess or deficiency on the other, but he says nothing about its coming-into-being in a
case where it does not exist at all.
LS: Ya, but destruction is of course the opposite to coming-into-being. You mean that he
says that it is preserved and not that it comes into being, that is the difference?
Student: He goes on to say that the fact that it’s also generated by—
LS: Now, yes, well, that is a transition to what he will discuss here. The first point he
makes is that the virtues or vices come into being by either following the mean or by
following the excess or deficiency. And then he will say [that] not only do the virtues
come into being in that way, but they also consist in preferring the mean to the excess or
the deficiency, and that is in a way prepared by this “it is preserved” to which you draw
our attention.
Same Student: But that’s precisely the assumption. In other words, the opposite of what
destroys can also bring into being, and—
LS: No, well, take the example of gymnastic exercises. That what brings into being
bodily strength is the mean: not too much, not too little. What about the situation after he
vii

In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

164

has acquired bodily strength? There will be a difference. Aristotle will make this clear in
the sequel. But the principle remains the same. There is also there an excess to be avoided
and a deficiency to be avoided. Say, the moderate man may be able to eat more than the
man who is becoming moderate (let us assume that for argument’s sake), but he cannot
eat everything all the time, and also he cannot fast all the time. This distinction remains.
But the question is: is there not a difference between the man who is becoming virtuous
and the man who has become virtuous? Aristotle will take that up in the sequel. Mr. . . . ?
Student: I wonder if this principle doesn’t apply to matters of the body, as for instance,
we know that, say, the fastest runners are not people who are, say, moderate in their
training regimen. They push themselves as hard as they can and to the point of
exhaustion. And further, it’s possible—
LS: But Aristotle, does he speak here—let me see, what does he say? But could there not
be an excess of training even there? Could there not be?
Same Student: Not as training, I would assume.
LS: Perhaps not of that specific training useful for this particular running. But there
would be other trainings which he must avoid, other gymnastic exercises. The general
answer to this will come later where Aristotle makes clear that virtue, while being a
mean, is in another way an extreme, a statement which acquired some political
importance in 1964, as some of you will know.viii [Laughter] You know?
Student: I’ve heard about that. [Laughter]
LS: Yes. I’m not surprised. But now let us first go on, until we have the whole evidence,
and then we will continue.
Reader:
But not only are the virtues both generated and fostered on one hand— (1104a27-28)
LS: Yes, let us translate here a bit more literal[ly]: “But not only are the comings-intobeing and the increases, and on the other hand the destructions, out of the same things
and by the same things, or the avoidance of the means.” Yes?
Reader:
but they will also find their exerciseix in the same actions.

viii

In his acceptance speech at the 1964 Republican Convention, Barry Goldwater (1909-1998),
the Republican presidential candidate, famously said: “I would remind you that extremism in the
defense of liberty is no vice. And let me remind you also that moderation in the pursuit of justice
is no virtue!”
ix
In Rackham’s translation: “their full exercise.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

165

LS: But not only the coming-into-being but also the actuality: the actual exercise after the
coming-into-being has reached its end and you are moderate, courageous, or for that
matter, well-trained in your body. Yes?
Reader:
This is clearly the case with the other more visible qualities, such as bodily strength: for
strength is produced by taking much food and undergoing much exertion, while also it is
the strong man who will be able to do these things.x
LS: “To the highest degree.” So in other words, you become strong by taking much food
and undergoing much pain, much toil. And yet once you have become strong, you are
able to take in much food and to undergo much toil. Yes?
Reader:
The same holds good with the virtues. We become moderate xi by abstaining from
pleasures, and at the same time we are best able to abstain from pleasures when we have
become moderate.xii
LS: This “best able” is important. There is a difference between the apprentice and the
master. The master will be more moderate than the apprentice; I mean, the master of
virtue will be more moderate than the apprentice. Yes?
Reader:
And so with Courage: we become brave by training ourselves to despise and endure
terrors, and we shall be best able to endure terrors when we have become brave.
(1104a28-b3)
LS: Yes. Let us stop here for the moment. Now what is true of the coming-into-being is
true also of the full-fledged activity, what Aristotle calls energeia, the being-at-work. The
being-at-work has not the character of a coming-into-being. We become good by doing
what is in the mean. We are good by doing what is in the mean. But after we have
become good it is much easier to do the mean than it was while we were still in the
process of becoming. That is the first difference between becoming good and being good.
Aristotle will develop this more in the sequel. Yes?
Reader:
A sign of our dispositionsxiii is afforded by the pleasure or pain that accompanies our
actions. A man is moderatexiv if he abstains from bodily pleasures and finds this
abstinence itself enjoyable, profligate if he feels it irksome; he is brave if he faces danger
with pleasure or at least without pain, cowardly if he does so with pain. (1104b3-8)

x

In Rackham’s translation: “able to eat most food and endure most exertion.”
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xiii
In Rackham’s translation: “An index of our dispositions.”
xiv
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

166

LS: Ya. So here he speaks now again . . . the difference between the coming-into-being
of goodness and the being good, or between the acquiring of the potency and the act.
Who has acquired the disposition (in Greek, the hexis) derives pleasure from the noble
actions. And this is surely connected with the greater ease. The man who has acquired
moderation: for him it is much easier to abstain from the wrong things, the wrong
quantities, or whatever it may be, and therefore, because there is no conflict involved, he
can derive pleasure from doing the virtuous things.
You note here perhaps the qualification he makes when he speaks of courage. He says the
man who undergoes hardships and is pleased with undergoing the hardships, or (he
makes this qualification)1 at least not pained by them. That will be developed by Aristotle
at some length in the discussion of courage in the third book, where it is made clear that
in the case of courage more than of any other virtue the enjoyment of one’s virtue is least
great because what it means is to face death and mutilation, and so on, and this is not as
enjoyable as the acts of the other virtues can be. And this is, in my opinion, the reason
why Aristotle begins his discussion of the virtues with courage, or at least one reason. In
other words, he ascends from the least high virtue to the highest, the highest in the moral
sphere being justice, as we will see later. Yes?
Student: Doesn’t it seem, though, more likely that a manly man might enjoy the thrill of
facing death more than he would enjoy abstaining from pleasures and being moderate?
LS: That is not Aristotle’s view, because Aristotle, as he makes clear there, says that the
truly courageous man is not a bully or a hired mercenary but a man who loses very much
by going to war and by dying. And therefore, because he has so much to lose—and he’s
speaking not so much of wealth and so on, or a nice family, but of the virtues he practiced
at home and the future of that—therefore for him it is particularly hard to lose his life,
perhaps prematurely. And there is no such danger involved in doing the acts of the other
virtues. Ya?
Student: You say that one of the reasons he begins with courage is because it is the least
pleasurable of the virtues, and the hierarchy of the virtues from that point of view would
seem to be a hierarchy of pleasures. But then from another point of view it would also
seem to be a hierarchy with respect to the intellectual qualities necessary for performing
the particular virtues. Is there a direct correspondence between that hierarchy of pleasures
and hierarchy of intellectual, or—
LS: There is perhaps some. I suppose that in the case of justice, at least the more
sophisticated forms in which man can practice justice, say, as judges, [one] requires more
sophistication, intellectual sophistication, than to decide the question of what to do right
here in the case of the other virtues. That is, I believe, true.
Ya. Well, as regards the relation of virtuous action and pleasures, you must not forget the
statement which we read in book 1: that there is an ultimate harmony between the noble
and the pleasant. Now from Aristotle’s point of view, this ultimate harmony is more
obvious in the case of the contemplative life than in the case of the practical life or the

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

167

moral life, and therefore there will be necessarily an ascent towards the philosophic life
from the moral life. Now let us read the sequel, where he will make this point somewhat
clearer than he did before.
Reader:
In fact pleasures and pains are the things with which moral virtue is concerned.
For pleasures cause us to do base actions and pain causes us to abstain from doing noble
actions. Hence the importance, as Plato points out, of having been definitely trained from
childhood to like and dislike the proper things; this is what good education means.
(1104b8-13)
LS: Ya. Let us stop here. Now here Aristotle draws a conclusion from what he had said
in the preceding section. Moral virtue has to do with pleasure and pain; and that would
distinguish it from the intellectual virtues, which may be accompanied by pleasures or
pains, but their theme is not pleasure and pain. Now moral virtue has to do with pleasure
and pain, that’s to say with resisting the allurements of pleasure and of pain. But the
strange fact: we must resist the allurements of pleasure in such a way that we derive
pleasure from the very resisting, and only when we have reached this stage are we
virtuous. Did you follow? Good.
You remember an earlier statement which was hard to follow in 1099a7 to 31, when
Aristotle spoke of the things which are by nature pleasant, by which he did not mean the
ordinary sensual pleasures. These pleasures deriving [from] or accompanying the acts of
virtue are by nature pleasant because they are related to man’s perfection, to his nature in
its fullest perfection. But this thought is not difficult to follow, I suppose. Or would you
like—we can here make a short stop, because the main point he wants to make is not
established by this point. He discusses first how virtue or vice [comes] into being. And
the ultimate conclusion of this discussion is that virtue and vice, or the study of virtue and
vices, has to do primarily with pleasure and pain, but pleasure and pain as something to
be resisted or controlled by something else in man. Yes?
Student: So this would seem to imply then that there are two sorts of pleasures: there are
first pleasures that have to be resisted, and then there are, in a way, the second pleasures.
But doesn’t that seem to overlook the fact that there’s something that seems very natural
about the first pleasures too, and that would seem almost ineradicable, and—
LS: Yes, sure, but—yes?
Student: One could be as ascetic as one likes, but presumably food will always taste
good.
LS: Especially if you are hungry. Yes, that would be very harsh and inhuman, to deny
that. But the point is this: you make a distinction, I suppose, between reasonable or
moderate eating and immoderate [eating]. There are kinds of “eating food” which are
self-punitive. You know? That you get nausea and all kinds of troubles if you eat these

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

168

things. So we must make a distinction between the pleasures which are followed by
immediate or not-quite immediate pain, which every sensible man would avoid, and the
pleasures which are all right. In other words, pleasures are also the unreasonable
pleasures as well as reasonable ones. So the distinction between preferable pleasures and
nonpreferable ones does not stem from pleasure but comes from a higher sphere, say,
from reason. That is at least Aristotle’s view. The hedonists, the men who said that the
good is identical with pleasure, tried to find a distinction within the sphere of pleasures
themselves. For example, they said [that] pleasures followed by pains are less pleasures
than pleasures not followed by pain. And here they claim that they did not have to
introduce a higher principle. Or lasting pleasures are to be preferred to short-lived
pleasures. Or pure pleasures, pleasures without the admixture of pain, are to be preferred
to pleasures which have in themselves an admixture of pain.
These various things were tried by both predecessors, contemporaries, and successors of
Aristotle. But Aristotle as well as Plato says that2 [one] cannot derive the principle of
human action [from pleasure]. And the reason can be stated as follows. After all, the
brutes too have pleasures. If you observe ants, or donkeys, or whatever, how they enjoy
getting their food, you see that they have pleasures, and also pains, if someone mistreats
them and so on, or lets them be hungry. But men have different pleasures. For example,
men enjoy the possession of gold, and a donkey would not give a damn for large amounts
of gold but he likes hay or other things, and men are not particularly pleased if they are
given hay. [LS chuckles] So when we speak of pleasure and pain, we mean of course
pleasure and pain which are pleasures and pains for human beings, and not pleasures and
pains for donkeys. Now then, in other words, when we speak of pleasure and pain we
make a tacit assumption, and the philosopher is not supposed to make merely tacit
assumptions, he is to make them explicit. And the explicit assumption is, then, to repeat,
that the pleasures and pains are human pleasures and human pains. But then, in order to
find out what the human pleasures and human pains are, you have to consider man,
human nature. And then you reach the conclusion according to Aristotle that man is the
animal that possesses discourse or reason, and therefore this will affect the pleasures, the
human pleasures. And it will affect them, in particular, in this way: that the pleasures
which are to the highest degree natural to man are those which derive from his resisting
the mere desires, and the promise of those desires, of pleasure. That is the point which
Aristotle makes.
So Aristotle does not deny that food and drink is pleasant or [say] that we should feel
guilty if we eat pleasing food rather than unpleasing food. That is not the point. But in
this sphere human excellence has no place. In other words, Aristotle implies that we
cannot admire a man for the fact that he eats all the time very well. Of course, in ordinary
language, we speak today of a gourmet as [someone possessing] a kind of virtue. Surely
he must have a particularly trained taste; and there is nothing wrong with that, but one
could also say that it is nothing grand. I mean, you would not vote for a presidential
candidate on the ground that he has an excellently-trained palate; or for that matter, you
wouldn’t choose him as an administrator of your fortune, if any, on the ground that he has
such a well-trained palate and so on. So it is a kind of nice social ornament to have this
quality because you can be sure when you will be invited to get a good meal, but you

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

169

wouldn’t call such a man an excellent human being. You would say he is a gourmet. Just
like tightrope dancing is a great art; I mean, there are few of us who could tightrope
dance, and yet one cannot say it is a high art. Yes, Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: I’m not exactly clear where I’m going, but I was thinking when you were
giving the example of a well-trained palate, one couldn’t help but think of the reason that
the pure and healthy city goes out of existence: because there are no relishes. So it seems
that a well-trained palate in the case of Plato, or at least of what Plato wrote, is very
important. Now in Aristotle, we don’t see the pure and healthy city going out of existence
for that same reason. I think it has something to do not with the palate but with certain
other pleasures, sexual pleasures. The family seems to be the root of the city rather than
the well-trained palate.
LS: Well, not sexual pleasures for Aristotle, but rather the procreation. And that
procreation is accompanied, as you know from the literature [laughter] by a certain
pleasure. That doesn’t explain the purpose of procreation.
Same Student: But what I’m trying to say is that it seems to me that Aristotle in some
ways is trying to play down the body from the point of view of the body, that is to say—
an example I gave earlier of the runner: the runner doesn’t want to become a fast runner;
he wants to become a faster runner. And after he becomes a faster runner, he would like
to become a still faster runner.
LS: Sure, that Aristotle knows, and—
Same Student: Sure, I would expect he does, but why doesn’t he . . . on the basis of—
LS: Because he has to consider the whole and the proportions. I mean, if a man
specializes in running, you know, and so on and so on, and forgets everything else, then
he may win all Olympic races and so on, but if he does this literally, he will neglect other
potentialities which he may have. And if he does not have them, that is also a defect, a
natural defect. And similarly the man who specializes, say, in the pleasures of the palate
and becomes the first gourmet of a whole country: there is something, a disorder there, a
hypertrophy of one thing and an atrophy of much more important things.
Same Student: But I mean, the disorder wouldn’t in itself be an objection—
LS: It would be an objection. It would be an objection. I mean, it doesn’t mean that this
man should be criminally prosecuted, but it is a defect. And when you think of such a
man in various relations, or just speak about him, you know, in general moral
discussions, you would know this fact, that it is—his dinners are wonderful, but he is an
unbearable bore. What did you want to say?
Student: You said that pleasures gained from moral virtue are by nature pleasurable.
LS: Yes.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

170

Same student: I’m confused now by what we mean by nature regarding intellectual
virtues.
LS: It is unfortunate (inevitable, although unfortunate) that we, the students of Aristotle,
think all the time of the end of this work, either because we have read it before or because
someone else has told us. And the end is then the contemplative life. And in the light of
it—when the sun shines, the moon is invisible, and also the particular beauties of colors
and what have you due to the shining of the moon must be abandoned. But we must
however make this effort, and the effort is not too difficult, to see the things as they
appear before philosophy has risen on the horizon. You know? That is at least the level
on which Aristotle speaks up to almost the end of the book. And within this horizon he
says, and I believe he means this also, ultimately, that the things3 by nature pleasant for
man are above all the pleasures which have to do with a specifically human perfection, so
that the pleasures deriving from food and so on do not belong to those things by nature
pleasant in an emphatic sense. That doesn’t mean that they are not pleasant in their way,
but the distinction of man, the excellence of man is not to be found in this sphere.
Incidentally, I hope you all are aware of the fact that what I said about the gourmet
applies equally to the specialist in sexual pleasures, although this is a richer sphere and
more complicated sphere. But it is true, it is only from a sense of propriety that I did not
make this explicit. Yes? [Laughter]
Student: It would seem though, in a strange sort of way, that when you speak of the
gourmet, or of the tightrope walker, or any of these specialists as in a way deformed
because they have only maximized, say, one potentiality and let other things go by the
wayside—in a way, it would seem that you could look at the philosopher in the same
way. He has actualized his fullest, the highest potentiality, nevertheless he seems
deformed, in a strange way.
Another Student: We know Socrates was very strong, but we also know that he wasn’t
particularly handsome.
LS: No, no. And that is a serious point, as Aristotle says. And why is it so serious? First,
because it is not pleasant, an ugly man. And secondly, because there is a presumption that
the ugliness of the body indicates an ugliness of the soul. And therefore, once a
physiognomist came to Athens and said to Socrates that he had a very bad character
underneath, and Socrates said: Yes, that’s true, but I corrected myself. [Laughter] But to
come to another example to illustrate the point: a man may have ears—and there are
limits: some have bigger ears, some have smaller ears, and they can be nice or not nice;
there are all kinds of possibilities there, but as Aristotle somewhere says, if the ear
becomes so very big, say, a yard long [laughter], then it would no longer fulfill the
function of an ear, i.e., it would no longer be an ear. Now similarly, a man who
specializes in some of these more or less far-fetched specialties, you know: he is like a
man with an overgrown ear or overgrown nose, and who can no longer fulfill his function
as a human being, his overall function, properly. It’s not very far-fetched, what Aristotle
suggests. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

171

Student: It seems then that Aristotle has, as you’ve said before, a single hierarchy of
virtues and vices which apply to all men—it’s applicable to all men and is a standard of
judgment for all men. And I wonder whether Plato, in his myth in the Republic regarding
three different kinds of men, doesn’t in some way not agree with Aristotle on that point?
LS: You mean in the tenth book, the myth?
Same Student: Well, insofar as earlier, where there were men of gold and silver, and
bronze and iron.
LS: Ya. But which are these three classes of man, I mean in Plato? The first he calls the
moneymaking men, ya? Chrēmatistikoi. The second are the soldiers; and the third,
highest, are the rulers: the wise men. The philosophers, eventually. Now this whole thing
in the Republic is based on a premise, the premise, namely, no private property, a premise
which Aristotle rejects. And therefore you have to reformulate it in order to bring out its
Aristotelian parallel. And then there would be the wise men—not the philosophers, that’s
the top—i.e., the most experienced and practically wise statesmen, and the chief support,
and in a way the support of the polis, the city, would be the gentlemen possessing private
property and supplying the core of the military force. Ya? And then the lower classes: the
craftsmen and farmers, peasants. I see no difficulty. I mean, there is a difference, but the
difference has nothing to do with the moral hierarchy; it’s a difference is regarding the
status of private property versus communism.
Same Student: But that’s what I’m not so sure about it. It seems that Plato does seem
more than Aristotle to imply that these men in some way have different natures, that they
are different—
LS: Yes, sure. Yes, naturally. Otherwise it wouldn’t be just.
Same Student: That’s right.
LS: Sure. Aristotle would fully agree, but only Aristotle would say it is very difficult to
build up a society according to nature because of the many borderline cases, as Plato
makes clear in the Republic by the nuptial number—you know, this whole system would
work if we could be sure that a good couple, husband and wife, will produce good
children.xv Now that is of course what we all expect, but then among the children a very
unpleasant great-granduncle, according to Mendel, xvi suddenly makes his appearance, to
the great grief of the parents. And so therefore, if there were a nuptial number which
would get us exactly which human couple would be sure to produce for all infinity
excellent offspring, that would be fine, but the nuptial number is so complicated that
hitherto no one has been able to say what it is. And there we have to leave it at not
goodness or badness, but at the presumption of goodness or badness. Everyone who has
any legal training has heard that legal presumptions are as good as facts in a legal
xv
xvi

See Republic 546b-d.
Gregor Johann Mendel (1822-1884), Austrian monk and founder of modern genetics.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

172

context. Now we presume therefore that decent people will have decent offspring. And if
you think how legal cases were decided in former times, and when the culprit was known
to be the son of decent parents, he was treated better than if his parents were not known
to be nice people. And still somewhat legally. Now this whole sphere is now in a
condition of radical reversal, as you surely know, and I don’t have to develop it. But
generally speakingxvii— . . . I follow them in the closet here and there of course. You
can’t expect exactness in these matters. [Laughter] . . . exactness. There is always a black
sheep around, but this doesn’t make a family a bad family, because the son, the black
sheep, may be sent to Sicily or to any other out of the way place, not to say to Australia,
and then no one knows anything. So in other words, there is a certain degree of
hypocrisy, to state it harshly. It’s inevitable in these matters, but hypocrisy is
nevertheless, as a French proverb says, a bow which vice makes to virtue. And therefore
it is not simply to be rejected from a very narrow-minded concern with sincerity at all
costs, because that also destroys quite a few charms and necessities of society. Yes?
Student: It still seems to be the case that theoretically, if the nuptial number could ever
work out and other practical difficulties could be overcome, that Plato does think that it’s
better to believe that men have different natures, whereas Aristotle—
LS: Aristotle asserts this in the strongest form. I mean, there is no question that this
notion of what Xenophon calls good natures, as distinguished from bad natures, has
nothing to do with what we call a “good natured” and a “bad natured” man, meaning men
with or without an inclination to thoughtful life and the absence of it. That these
distinctions exist [is evident]. I would say even today, I mean, in the age where some
people believe that IQs alone are a sufficient criterion for distinguishing between
preferable and less preferable students, even today that is recognized. But indeed, what
they mean by a good nature is something more, something richer than a high IQ.
Same Student: But there’s difference, or is there between Aristotle’s notion of a
disposition to goodness or to badness and Plato’s notion of truly different kinds?
LS: Well, the disposition, as we have come across here, the hexis, is acquired; is
acquired, and to that extent not natural. But there is a difference of which he hasn’t
spoken yet because he cannot speak of all things at the same time: there is a difference
between men who have a natural aptitude, say, to acquire courage or magnanimity, and
men who lack that natural aptitude, who may still be able to acquire it, but with much
greater difficulty. He speaks of it later on.
Same Student: So Plato would say that some men can’t acquire certain virtues, wouldn’t
he?
LS: Certain men?
Same Student: For instance, a craftsman has no hope in any real sense.
xvii

The tape was changed at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

173

LS: You must make a distinction, that the actual craftsman may be a man compelled by
unfortunate circumstances to be a craftsman, but he could have become a first-rate
mathematician. That happens, and vice versa. So I mean the actual social hierarchy is not
identical with the natural hierarchy.
Same Student: But in Plato it is. I mean, in the ideal case.
LS: Ya. The Republic is based on the impossible assumption that there can be a society
which is perfectly just, in which the actual hierarchy is identical with the natural
hierarchy. But the Republic, I think, properly understood, shows that this is an impossible
assumption, and one of the signs is the nuptial number. It is not enough to have it now for
one moment of the founding act, but you want to have it for all the future, or at least for
many generations, and that means that the upper-stratum parents generate upper-stratum
children and that the lower-stratum parents generate lower-stratum children. But this
doesn’t function, and therefore you have a choice: either you say we will be very strict
and just, and if a boy with a good nature—or a girl, for matter—will be born in the lower
classes, he or she will be sent up immediately, as his or her superiority is found out, to the
higher classes. Then there will be a lot of difficulty, because in the lower classes they
know their parents. You know? They know their parents. And then think of this boy of
two years who shows amazing signs of superiority [and] will be drawn away from his
mother, and what mental sufferings you impose on that boy and his mother and father. So
it will amount in practice to a caste system, i.e., the presumption that the upper-class
offspring will be upper-class and the lower-class offspring will be lower-class. Either you
have constant upheaval and terrible human suffering, or else you have to be satisfied with
the factual difference between the actual hierarchy and the natural hierarchy.
I think that is exactly what Plato wants to show in the Republic: why the problem of
justice does not permit of a perfect solution. And when he says somewhere, I think it is in
book 4, Socrates says something to the effect that: Where in the good city, which we have
founded, will we find justice and injustice? Shorey,xviii a well-known commentator and
translator of Plato, says: “There is of course no injustice in Plato’s republic.” Well, he
knows better than Socrates what Socrates meant. Of course there will be injustice in it,
because no human institutions can be perfectly just, can be perfectly just because, if I
may use now modern language, the injustice which nature has perpetrated by producing
human beings of different kinds and by not supplying us with simple rules so that we can
be sure the offspring of good parents will be good: this can never be corrected by man.
Well, people hope now that some discoveries in genetics will make it possible for the
future. Pardon? Is this not so?
Student: Yes, they think that. They think that, but . . .
LS: Yes. We will discuss it as soon as it has been completed. [Laughter] Otherwise we
will fall into that mistake into which some scientists fell in 1828, when a German chemist
produced uric acid in a test tube, and there was great enjoyment: Now the problem of life
xviii

Paul Shorey (1857-1934), American classical scholar, author of What Plato Said (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1933).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 10

174

has been solved!xix [Laughter] And we have heard this many times since. And let us wait
until they make a human being, or even a dog, in a test tube, then we will say: Yes, they
succeeded.xx Good.
Aristotle will go on here in the sequel and show, to make it quite clear, why virtue, i.e.,
moral virtue, is concerned with pleasure and pain, and he dwells on it for quite some
time. Yes?
Student: This passage here seems to be implying that men do what they do because of
pleasure . . . Does he actually believe that?
LS: Not quite. That is not quite his opinion. But men prefer what they prefer for a variety
of reasons. And there is a general tripartition made by Aristotle: the noble, the useful, and
the pleasant. For example, people prefer the useful, which is not as such pleasant. Think
of tooth extraction: it is not pleasant, but it may be useful. But it also has nothing
intrinsically noble. But on the other hand, the highest consideration is that of the noble:
what is intrinsically preferable. And what Aristotle claims is that while at first glance
there seems to be a clear cleavage, not to say opposition, between the noble and the
pleasant—Aristotle contends that close analysis shows that there is no such opposition
and not even a cleavage, because there are pleasures deriving from resisting the low-class
pleasures and undergoing the low-class pain, and fears, and dangers. That is a somewhat
complicated but not far-fetched solution, because something of this kind we all know, I
think, from our own experiences.
Now is there anything else you would like to bring up?xxi
1

Deleted “or.”
Moved “from pleasure.”
3
Deleted “by nature good for man.”
2

xix

See Friedrich Wöhler, “On the Artificial Production of Urea,” Annalen der Physik und Chemie
no. 88 (1828).
xx
The first “test tube” baby was born in 1978.
xxi
Strauss concludes with a question about who is willing to write a paper for the course.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

175

Session 11: March 18, 1968
Leo Strauss: Is Mr. . . . here?
Student: No.
LS: No. Aha. Well, at any rate, I will read his statement. Or is it not—oh, yes, the time
has come. “At the beginning of the Republic, the translator” (he doesn’t say which)
“refers to a passage in the Magna Moralia, traditionally ascribed to Aristotle, where
Aristotle declares flute playing to be an art in itself. In book 8 of the Politics, flute
playing is seen additionally as fostering other ends, good and bad. Could one differentiate
between flute playing, flute playing as a medium for music, and flute playing expressing
a music which fosters actions or attitude, or are the first two in Aristotle the same?”
Now I looked up the passage in Aristotle to which Mr. . . . referred, 1197a9 to 10. “And
there is no other end for flute playing but this very thing, the activity of flute playing,”
i.e., flute playing is not an art which produces something else, like shoemaking, which
produces shoes, but the flute playing produces flute playing. There is no product of flute
playing. That is all that Aristotle says here. This does not exclude of course the
possibility that flute playing might be used for another end, namely, let’s say, for the end
of education. Of course that is an entirely different consideration, whether there is an art
which cannot be put to the use of any other art. And the other question, whether there are
not two kinds of arts, arts productive of products—like shoes, chairs and so on, pills—
and arts which do not produce products but activities—there should be no difficulty in
that.
Now we might perhaps reflect before we begin on the difficulty of Aristotle’s Ethics as a
whole. Now Aristotle has this notion that there is an end of man, and according to him all
beings have an end, not only plants and animals but also inanimate things, insofar as, say,
the heavy things by nature tend toward the center of the earth. Now this notion of ends,
natural ends, is very plausible if we think of the clear case of an acorn leading to an oak,
and then the oak again producing acorns, leading to other oaks. But if we take on the
other hand the human embryo as the beginning, corresponding to the oak, leading up to
the perfect gentleman, this is not as simple as the acorn’s way toward the oak. We are
therefore inclined to say that man’s end is not imposed on him by nature as the end of the
acorn is imposed on it by nature. But the end of man is freely chosen, in the sense of
freely posited. Man could as well have imposed on himself other ends, and we see as a
matter of fact different human beings choosing different ends, and more generally
different epochs and cultures choosing different ends. There is no definite result of the
development beginning with the fertilization of the human egg, and this seems to be the
unique character of man: this freedom not to have by nature an end.
Now Aristotle recognizes the uniqueness of man, in particular in a passage of his work on
the soul, where he says the soul is in a manner all things, and he means by that the human

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

176

soul.i It would not make sense from Aristotle’s point of view in the case of any other
soul, divine or bestial. Man and only man is a microcosm. So Aristotle knows the
uniqueness of man, and his whole reasoning regarding man’s end is based on this
awareness.
Now how does Aristotle argue in the Ethics as we have read it hitherto? In the passages
in 1097b25 and thereabouts, we have seen [that] Aristotle starts from the question: is
there a work of man? In the case of the arts, we see each peculiar art has a peculiar end:
shoemaking, carpentry, and whatever it may be. And the same is true also of the parts of
the human body: there is a work of the eyes, a work of the ears, and so on. And then he
draws from this the conclusion in 1098a16 to 17, the conclusion being that the human
good is the excellent activity of the soul, meaning of course of the human soul. Now what
Aristotle presupposes here is that man is the rational animal, and therefore the activity of
reason, the excellent activity of reason, is the end of man. But could one not say the same
of any human work well done, for example, of the shoemaker? For there is no human
work, however lowly, which does not presuppose the use of reason. Even [the] collecting
of garbage is something which presupposes a minimum use of reason, but precisely this
fact shows that there is a hierarchy of works which man can do. Concretely, the
bridlemaker: that serves the art of the horseman; the art of the horseman serves the art of
war; and the art of war serves the political or statesman’s art. So the political art is then
the architectonic art, and this fact proves that there is a single human end in spite of the
variety of ends, insofar as all other ends serve one highest end.
But here of course questions arise. For example, is poetry too subject to the political art?
If it is, censorship would be perfectly all right. And Plato and Aristotle did not refrain,
did not hesitate to accept this conclusion, as you know from books 2 and 3 of the
Republic, and as you might know from the eighth book of the Politics. Yet there is one
activity which from Plato’s and Aristotle’s point of view cannot be subject to the political
art, and that is philosophy. And this is proven by the very fact which seems to refute it,
namely, the notion of the philosopher-king. The philosophers must be politically active.
They must be kings only if they are the rulers. That’s to say the philosophers are never
rightfully subject to politics or to the political art. And therefore, from Plato’s and
Aristotle’s point of view, poetry would acquire some immunity from this subjection to
the extent to which it is akin to philosophy. Poetry as wisdom, as a kind of wisdom, could
conceivably be free from subjection to the political art. And some famous poets of earlier
times, such as Virgil, Dante, and Shakespeare, would seem to have agreed with this view
of poetry, a view which today is of course very unpopular. Now this much to remind us
of the overall context.
Now for the immediate context in book 2. Aristotle has made clear that moral or ethical
virtue arises through habituation: by doing the just and noble things, we become just and
noble. Yet there is of course a difference between the apprentices and the masters;
between those who are still in the stage of becoming good and those who are already
good. Aristotle turns to a more precise discussion of how we become good for the reason
indicated in 1103b27 following, namely, the purpose of our investigation here is not to
i

Aristotle, On the Soul 431b21.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

177

know what virtue is, what goodness is, but to become good; and therefore let us see how
do we become good. And then he finds out this general principle I stated before: that by
doing the just and noble things, we become just and noble. He must therefore raise the
question: what is the difference here between the apprentice and the master, between the
man becoming good and the man who is good? And the first answer is: it is much easier
to do the noble and just things for the master than for the apprentice; and connected with
it is: it is much more pleasant for the master than for the apprentice. The apprentice has to
overcome himself all the time, whereas the master has acquired this mastery.
In the passage which we read last, Aristotle suggests this: moral virtue has to do with
pleasure and pain, meaning with resisting the allurements of pleasure, and the opposite
regarding pain. But by resisting the allurements of pleasure, we acquire the habit by
virtue of which we derive pleasure from this very resisting, and when we do that, we have
reached the end of this process. So the theme becomes now, as has appeared already, that
moral virtue has to do with pleasure and pain. And this theme he develops in the sequel.
This is 1104b13.
Reader:
Again, if the virtues have to do with actions and emotions, and every emotion ii and every
action is attended with pleasure or pain, this too shows that virtue has to do with pleasure
and pain.
Another indication is the fact that pain is the medium of punishment; for punishment is a
sort of medicine, and it is the nature of medicine to work by means of opposites.
(1104b13-18)
LS: Ya. So here he gives a second reason why virtue is concerned with pleasure and
pain.1 This is confirmed by how we treat vicious actions: we treat them by inflicting pain
on the doers of the vicious actions. Punishment is like a medicine: of course, like a
medicine, otherwise vice would be the same as illness, which Aristotle never admits and
he discusses at length in the third book. I don’t know whether some of you have ever read
Samuel Butler’s Erewhon, where Butler experiments with the opposite view: diseases are
crimes, and crimes are diseases, so that the criminals are treated by physicians, physicians
of the soul, and the bodily sick are treated by judges. iii But today we have a position
which has as much to do with that satirized by Butler rather than what Aristotle says.
Yes. Now the third point which he makes in the sequel.
Reader:
Again, as we said before, every formed disposition of the soul realizes its nature iv in
relation to and in dealing with those things v by which it is its nature to be corrupted or
improved. But men are corrupted through pleasures and pains, that is, either by pursuing
and avoiding the wrong pleasures and pains, or by pursuing and avoiding them at the
ii

In Rackham’s translation: “feelings, and every feeling.”
Samuel Butler, Erewhon; or, Over the Range (1872), chapter 10.
iv
In Rackham’s translation: “its full nature.”
v
In Rackham’s translation: “that class of objects.”
iii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

178

wrong time, or in the wrong manner, or in one of the other wrong ways under which
errors of conduct can be logically classified.
LS: “Logically” is of course an entirely redundant addition of the editor. I mean, what
other classification does he mean? Like alphabetical, or what? So here he gives the third
reason: the nature of virtue and vice is related to such things and is concerned with such
things as are the natural causes of the coming-into-being of virtue and vice. The nature of
virtue and vice is distinguished from the coming-into-being of virtue and vice. But virtue
and vice come into being by the proper or improper pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of
pain. To make this quite clear, because it is somewhat complicatedly expressed by the
author: we become good or bad by pursuing pleasure and pain in the right or the wrong
way. But the coming-into-being throws an important light on the result of that genetic
process, on the nature of virtue and vice. Is this clear? Now?
Reader:
This is why some thinkers define the virtues as states of impassivity or tranquillity,
though they make a mistake in using these terms simply,vi without adding ‘in the right (or
wrong) manner’ and ‘at the right (or wrong) time’ and the other qualifications.
LS: So this is a corollary to what Aristotle said before. What was implied could lead to
the conclusion which some people have drawn, that virtue is freedom from passions
(apatheia; apathy, literally translated), but Aristotle says virtue is not simply freedom
from affections but freedom from affections in the right kind of circumstances. For
example, anger: to overcome one’s anger is by no means universally a good action,
because there are situations in which we should become angry. And the same applies to
the other passions as well, or almost all other passions as well, and therefore this is not a
new argument but a corollary to argument number four. Yes?
Reader:
Therefore moral virtue is held to bevii the quality of acting in the best way in relation to
pleasures and pains, and vice is the opposite.
But the following considerations also will give us further light on the same point.
(1104b18-30)
LS: That is a new argument, a fourth reason why virtue is concerned with pleasures and
pains: Yes?
Reader:
There are three things that are the motives of choice and three that are the motives of
avoidance; namely, the noble, the expedient, and the pleasant, and their opposites, the
base, the harmful, and the painful. Now in respect of all these the good man goes right,
and the bad goes wrong,viii but especially in respect of pleasure; for pleasure is common
vi

In Rackham’s translation: “absolutely.”
In Rackham’s translation: “We assume there for that moral virtue is.”
viii
In Rackham’s translation: “the good man is likely to go right and the bad to go wrong.”
vii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

179

to man with the lower animals, and also it is a concomitant of all the objects of choice,
since both the noble and the expedient appear pleasant.ix
LS: Yes. Now here is a general statement on the three highest classes of things preferred.
They are called here the noble, the useful or expedient, and the pleasant. This is
underlying the division used also in Aristotle’s Rhetoric, where he devotes a chapter to
each of the three kinds of things in the first book of the Rhetoric. You could do worse
than reading these three chapters. And Aristotle tries here to show again why virtue has to
do with the pleasures and pains, although there are three kinds of preferable things: not
only the pleasant and painful, but also the noble and the base, and the useful and
harmful.2 The pleasant is the most universal of these things. In the first place, all living
beings are concerned with pleasure and pain, whereas only man is concerned in addition
with the useful and the noble and the opposites; and secondly, even the noble and the
useful come to sight as pleasant, whereas not everything pleasant comes to sight as noble
or useful. So pleasure is the most universal of the three considerations. [Pleasure is] most
universal among all the species of beings and among the species of things preferred or
desired by man. Yes?
Reader:
Again, the susceptibility to pleasure has grown up with all of us from the cradle. Hence
this feeling is hard to eradicate, being ingrained in the fabric of our lives.
Again, pleasure and pain are also the standard by which we all, in a greater or less degree,
regulate our actions. On this account therefore pleasure and pain are necessarily our
whole concern,x since to feel pleasure and pain rightly or wrongly has no small effect xi on
conduct.
LS: Here the translation is misleading. This is only a single argument. The second
“again” he uses doesn’t occur in the original. This is the fifth reason given by him. We
sense pleasure and pain from the moment of our birth, and this is not simply identical
with the fact that pleasure and pain is common to all animals and therefore also to man
before he has shown in any way his peculiarly human qualities, the moment of his birth,
because the point which he makes here is this: because we begin our life guided by
pleasure and pain alone, this forms us throughout our lives, and the pleasures and pains
we have enjoyed or avoided from our earliest childhood on. Therefore this is another
reason why the moral philosopher must pay special attention to pleasure and pain. Yes?
Reader:
And again, it is harder to fight against pleasure than against anger (as Heraclitus says).xii
(1104b30-1105a8)

ix

In Rackham’s translation: “appear to us pleasant.”
In Rackham’s translation: “main concern.”
xi
In Rackham’s translation: “a great effect.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “(hard as that is, as Heracleitus says).”
x

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

180

LS: Heraclitus had said it is hard to fight against anger or spiritedness; this must be
understood accordingly. And now Aristotle, correcting Heraclitus as it were, says:
Heraclitus forgot that it is still harder to fight against pleasure than against anger or
spiritedness. Yes?
Reader:
But virtue and art arexiii constantly dealing with what is harder, since the harder the task
the better is success.
LS: Ya, that is the sixth argument. So since it is so hard to control pleasure, controlling
pleasure belongs to this kind of thing: the kind of thing to which all arts and virtues
belong. All arts and virtues have to do with the overcoming of difficulties. 3 What we can
do without difficulty, for example, plucking an apple from a tree, there is no art necessary
for that: we just pluck it. But whenever there is a difficulty to overcome, then we need
either an art or a virtue. And therefore the fact that we have to do that, [that] in moral or
political philosophy we have to deal with pleasure and pain, is another confirmation of
this. Aristotle implies here that pleasure–pain rather than spiritedness, to use a Platonic
interpretation, is the fundamental phenomenon. The spiritedness, as Plato calls in the
Republic thymos, is derivative. We get angry if we do not get what we desire. The desire
is first, and if the desire is thwarted, then anger arises. Yes?
Reader:
For this reason also therefore pleasure and pain are necessarily the whole concern both of
virtue and of political science, since he who comports himself toward them rightly will be
good, and he who does so wrongly, bad.
LS: So virtue and the political technē, not all arts, deal with pleasures and pains. Yes?
Reader:
We may then take it as established that virtue has to do with pleasures and pains, that the
actions which produce it are those which increase it, and also, if differently performed,
destroy it, and that the actions from which it was produced are also those in which it is
exercised. (1105a9-16)
LS: Ya. Now this is a summary of the section that began at 1104b3. A sign of the habits,
as distinguished from the coming-into-beings, are the pleasures and pains which
accompany them or arise together with them. Yes. Now this chapter we have now
concluded, and let us turn to the sequel. Or is there any question? Yes? I forgot your
name again, I’m sorry.
Student: Does the noble feel pleasant only to the virtuous man?
LS: No, the noble—that is a qualification you make in the spirit of Aristotle. But still,
more generally stated, the noble and the useful appear to be pleasant. And you add, “only
to a certain kind of man.” But Aristotle says: “Still, they appear pleasant, don’t they?”
xiii

In Rackham’s translation: “virtue, like art, is.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

181

And therefore, whereas the opposite is not true, the pleasant does not appear as useful—I
mean, i.e., every pleasant [thing] does not appear to be useful. Every pleasure does not
appear to be noble. Is this not true?
Same Student: I was thinking of the . . . for beautiful things, the difficulty of the
beautiful things . . .
LS: Yes. But still, to limit ourselves to the simple and clear case to which you referred:
for the noble character, these hard things would nevertheless be pleasant. So Aristotle is
right. The inverse is not true, and this means the consideration of pleasure and pain is the
broadest of all considerations. That does not mean that it is the authoritative
consideration, for as we will soon hear straight from Aristotle’s mouth, if we have not
heard it already before: what is important is not to feel pleasure and pain—that doesn’t
require any effort—but the right posture towards pleasure and pain. That this right
posture is then pleasant for those who have acquired mastery is indeed true. But the
primary consideration is that it is a mastery, is an attitude or posture toward pleasures and
pains, and not that it is also in itself pleasant given a certain stage of moral development.
Are you satisfied or not?
Same Student: Actually, this question, I think, is . . .
LS: No, I cannot hear—
Same Student: You answered most of the question . . .
LS: Yes, but still there must be some excess of your question [laughter] beyond what I
answered.
Same Student: Well, I’ll hold off.
LS: All right. Perhaps it will be clearer later on. Fine. Yes?
Another Student: At the beginning of your lecture, you discussed human freedom, but
in Aristotle’s statement that childhood—the habits that one learns as a child make all the
difference, well, supreme difference, the supreme importance: how—do these conflict?
LS: Well, the simplest answer would be to say [that] Aristotle will discuss the question of
freedom in book 3, to which we will soon come. But Aristotle ascribes to man both
freedom and this kind of determination coming from upbringing: both. In other words, a
man who has acquired the habit of getting drunk cannot easily get rid of that. That
doesn’t mean that he doesn’t have freedom, as is shown by the fact that if this man who
has acquired the habit of drinking runs over a man with his car, he will be punished for
drunken driving, and no one will say he will be excused because he is an habitual
drunkard. Do you see? I mean, that is the way in which Aristotle argues. The practice of
legislation is as important a clue for Aristotle to find out what good and bad is and how to
think about it then in so-called abstract considerations. Does it not make sense?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

182

Same Student: Well, yes, but it was his emphasis on the habits that men learn in youth.
LS: Ya. But is this not true? Are men not shaped to a considerable extent by their
upbringing? Not completely, because you find black sheep in the best families. So two
brothers who had the same upbringing: one is good, one is bad. One could say: well, one
had a better nature than the other. That could very well be. It could also be a right or
wrong use of freedom. That’s a long question. We are not yet prepared for that. But the
only thing I can say in defense of Aristotle, if such defense is necessary, [is] that no one
denies the importance of upbringing for the character we finally have. Whether it is not
possible for a human being to become a good man even if he had the very worst of
upbringings, Aristotle doesn’t speak about it, but I think he implies the possibility. But he
would have to have some other influences, perhaps: just [seeing] other people [and] how
they live, and to be more attracted by that than by the conduct he found at his home
and so [have] success. But primarily we do not have the ability to set our ultimate goals
by ourselves, but they are imposed on us by our society or family or what have you. And
it requires a high degree of maturity before a man can think of choosing his own goals.
So then we will go on in 1105a17. Yes?
Reader:
A difficulty may however be raised as to what we mean by saying that in order to become
just men must do just actions, and in order to become moderate, they must do moderate
actions. For if they do just and moderate actions, they are just and moderate xiv already,
just as, if they spell correctly or play in tune, they are grammarians xv or musicians.
LS: Is this clear, this difficulty? Must you not already be a just man in order to do just
actions? And that is a difficulty which has not been discussed by Aristotle in this form,
and it is very necessary to discuss it. Now how does he solve it?
Reader:
But perhaps this is not the case even with the arts. It is possible to spell a word correctly
by chance, or because someone else prompts you; hence you will be a grammarian only if
you spell correctly in the grammarian’s way, that is, in virtue of the grammarian’s
knowledge which you yourself possess.xvi (1105a17-26)
LS: Ya. “According to the grammatical knowledge in him.” Now Aristotle solves here
the difficulty first regarding the arts. There is the difference between the apprentice who
still spells correctly but who does not have the principle of correct spelling in himself;
that is in the teacher. But once he has learned, he has acquired the principle of right
spelling, then it is in him, and then he will do not only the grammatically correct things,
but he will do them also in a grammatical way, which means in the way in which a
knower of the grammatical art would do them. Is this clear? The same applies to the
shoemaker and to any other artist. Now Aristotle comes to the question: so this is fairly
xiv

The reader substitutes “moderate” for Rackham’s “temperate” throughout the passage.
In Rackham’s translation: “scholars.”
xvi
The reader susbstitues “grammarian” for Rackham’s “scholar” throughout the passage.
xv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

183

simple in the case of the arts, but how is it in the case of the virtues? That he discusses in
the sequel.
Reader:
Moreover the case of the arts is not really analogous to that of the virtues. Works of art
have their merit in themselves, so that it is enough if they are produced having a certain
quality of their own; but acts done in conformity with the virtues are not done justly or
moderatelyxvii if they themselves are of a certain sort, but only if the agent also is in a
certain statexviii when he does them: first he must act with knowledge; secondly he must
choosexix the act, and choose it for its own sake; and thirdly the act must spring from a
fixed and permanent disposition of character. For the possession of an art, none of these
conditions is included except the mere qualification of knowledge; but for the possession
of the virtues, knowledge is of little or no avail, whereas the other conditions, so far from
being of little moment, are all-important, inasmuch as virtue results from the repeated
performance of just and moderatexx actions. (1105a26-b5)
LS: So knowing is of decisive importance in the arts: you have to know how to spell. And
if you know how to spell completely, then you are a good speller or a good practitioner of
the art of letters, grammar. But knowing is not of decisive importance in the virtues. In
the case of the virtues, it is much more important that the right actions be performed in
the right spirit; that is to say, for their own sake. Now let us make this clear, why is this
different in the arts? A good carpenter, or even a first-rate carpenter, may be a man who
sleeps or is drunk most of the time and does his work only in order to get money for
buying whisky or other things of the same kind. That does not necessarily detract from
his being a first-rate carpenter. The good man, as distinguished from the good artist, must
do the right things for their own sake, be dedicated to them, and enjoy doing them,
whereas this good carpenter of whom I spoke may not enjoy it at all. He may enjoy only
the whisky, but he can nevertheless be a very competent carpenter. This is possible.
So there is a certain parallelism of the arts and the virtues, as we have seen, but there is
an equally important radical difference between the two. We might perhaps consider for
one moment the relation of the philosopher to the artisan on the one hand, and to the
morally virtuous man on the other. The philosopher has something very important in
common with the artisan on the one hand, and with the morally virtuous man, the
spoudaios, on the other. He has in common with the artisan that his perfection consists
above all in knowledge; he has in common with the morally virtuous man that the
philosopher is dedicated, dedicated to his work, but in such a way that the dedication
necessarily follows from the knowledge. Knowledge does not play that great role in the
case of the morally virtuous man. We must of course never forget when speaking of
philosophy in connection with Aristotle or Plato that a philosopher in their sense is not
the same as what we understand frequently today by a philosopher, namely, a professor

xvii

In Rackham’s translation: “temperately.”
In Rackham’s translation: “state of mind.”
xix
In Rackham’s translation: “deliberately choose.”
xx
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xviii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

184

of philosophy or men who “do philosophy,” to use this beautiful expression. That is like
you “do Italy,” or whatever else it may be. That must be understood. Yes?
Reader:
Thus although actions are entitled just and moderate xxi when they are such acts as just and
moderate men would do, the agent is just and moderate not when he does these acts
merely, but when he does them in the way in which just and moderate men do them.
(1105b5-9)
LS: This is clear. A man is not moderate if he is moderate regarding his food, for
example. His being moderate in regard to his food may be due to his fear of pain, of an
operation, or of punishment; then he is not truly moderate. His external action looks like
the external action of a moderate man, but since the whole action includes not only the
external action but the spirit in which it is performed as well, he is not a moderate man,
strictly speaking. Yes?
Student: But you have a sculptor who is unveiling a statue. Where is the art? In the soul
of the sculptor.
LS: And also in the work of art.
Same Student: It’s not a work of art. It’s a product.
LS: Sculpturing is in the sculptor’s mind. So his sculpturing necessarily culminates in a
work hence separate from the sculptor, as a shoe is from the shoemaker.
Same Student: Yes, but the shoe and the sculpture are not art. They are the works of a
shape of the soul. If the shape of a soul regards merely shoes or merely statues, that’s one
thing. If the shape of the soul regards action with regard to other men, it’s justice, and so
on and so forth. So it would appear that the necessary distinction between an art and
virtue is not that one is not the shape of a soul; they’re both shapes of the soul but with
regard to different things. Would that seem unreasonable?
LS: I do not know exactly what you are driving at. The artisan, says Aristotle, does not
have to do his work for its own sake, because of its end.
Same Student: Insofar as a man is a good carpenter, or insofar as a man is a good
shepherd, he will do these things for the sake of the beautiful table or of the nice fat
sheep.
LS: Not according to Aristotle. That is what Aristotle denies. This is not necessary for
the goodness of the [artisan]. In other words, the good carpenter is characterized by the
fact that he does carpentry well, but doing carpentry well does not mean full dedication to
carpentry.
xxi

The reader substitutes “moderate” for Rackham’s “temperate” throughout the passage.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

185

Same Student: Right.
LS: That is what Aristotle said. I know that it is possible to look at artisans, and
especially at artists, in a very different way, and part of this different way of looking at it
appeared in what you said. But this is not the Aristotelian way in the case of the artisan,
[or] even in the case of the sculptor: the sculptor may be animated by desire for fame and
for money. And since you mentioned justice, there is no contradiction between being a
first-rate carpenter, or for that matter a first-rate sculptor, and a man who cheats: think of
the example of Phidias, who was at least accused of having stolen gold which was given
to him for making a statue at the Acropolis. To repeat, the artisan can be a good artisan
while being a very immoral man. Therefore Aristotle goes so far in the Politics [as] to say
that a slave—he means of course the slave you use in your home—must have more moral
virtue than an artisan, because the artisan doesn’t live in your house. And therefore, if the
merchandise he brings you is satisfactory, that is all you expect from him, but you don’t
wish to have a man in your house who is drunk most of the time and, God knows, steals
and whatever.
Same Student: But both things, both arts and virtues, have to do with habitual or more or
less permanent shapings of the soul, right?
LS: Yes, yes. That you can say.
Same Student: More or less directed toward different things.
LS: But there is this great difference, of which Aristotle speaks shortly after, but I can
mention it now. The good artisan can make good shoes as well as bad shoes, yes, if he
wants to. He has complete mastery of the art, and if he wants to show you a masterpiece
of a shoe which doesn’t fit any human being, he can do that. But the good man cannot act
badly. You see? So there is an important difference.
Student: Now doesn’t he imply here in this passage that with respect to the relationship
between the arts and the virtues, the virtues are infinitely superior to the arts because the
arts are always chosen, with the exception of the architectonic arts, for the sake of
something else; and the virtues must be chosen for their own selves, so that within each
architectonic order among the arts—for instance, various arts leading up to the warrior’s
art, the virtuous man would choose the warrior’s art for the sake of something else or the
virtue of courage; and that even when it comes to the political art, which is the ordering
of the arts in the proper way, philosophy stands above the political art so that though it
might be the architectonic art, it can’t be the architectonic.
LS: Well, philosophy is—one should in a way not speak of philosophy in our present
stage. I know that I have sinned against that rule, and therefore I shouldn’t appeal to that
rule in order [LS chuckles] to silence you. That is so. One point which you made that is
doubtlessly correct and will be confirmed very soon by Aristotle himself, that the virtues
are of a much higher rank than the arts, this is clear. I mean, this was one point which you
wanted to make, and this is correct. Now as to your other point, what you have in mind, I

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

186

believe, is this question: what is the relation between the political art—the highest art, at
least in the state of action—and virtue? I can give you the Aristotelian answer, given by
him in book 6: there is no moral virtue possible without the copresence of practical
wisdom (in Latin prudentia and in Greek phronesis). So in other words, you cannot be
virtuous without being practically wise. I mean, if you do not know when to be friendly,
and so on so on . . . to know when then you will not be friendly, or gentle, or whatever it
may be. Good.
And now Aristotle says there are various manifestations of prudence. Prudence simply:
that is the prudence of the individual regarding his actions. Then the economic action, the
art (oikonomikē means in Greek the management of the household): the prudence you can
show in your relation to your spouse, your children, your servants, and so on. And finally,
the highest of them is the political art: the political prudence. So if we limit ourselves to
this remark of Aristotle, the political art is the highest form of prudence and [is] therefore
inseparable from moral virtue, but not identical with that because it puts the emphasis on
the intellectual ingredient. Now the intellectual ingredient would be much more
important, relatively speaking, in political prudence than in private prudence. As regards
private prudence, Aristotle can say there is not much knowledge in it implied, as we have
seen, but as regards political prudence, he could not say that. One could perhaps say, but
that is not borne out by any explicit statement of Aristotle, that the percentage of
knowledge and of moral virtue going into political prudence differs from the percentage
of knowledge and moral virtue going into private prudence, i.e., a higher percentage of
knowledge [is] needed for political prudence, and a lower percentage [is] needed for
private prudence. The degree of prudence required for solving the problem of Vietnam
now is greater than4 [that required for solving any problem of prudence] likely to occur to
any individual in his life, unless there are very extreme situations which are no longer a
matter of prudence but of the psychiatrist, if there are such cases. Good. Yes. Now we are
in 1105b5, aren’t we?
Reader:
It is correct therefore to say that a man becomes just by doing just actions and moderate
by doing moderate actions;xxii and no one can have the remotest chance of becoming
good without doing them. But the many,xxiii instead of doing these thingsxxiv— (1105b913)
LS: Let us—did you hear the sentence? There is no way of becoming just or moderate
except by acting justly and moderately. Would you admit that? I mean, if you have not
done that for quite some time, you cannot be just. If this is a limitation on human
freedom, well, it can’t be helped. But it could perhaps be only a limitation on mere
arbitrariness, that we cannot become good just by making a resolution to be good. We
have to do something about it. Yes?

xxii

In Rackham’s translation: “moderate by doing moderate actions.”
In Rackham’s translation: “the mass of mankind.”
xxiv
In Rackham’s translation: “virtuous acts.”
xxiii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

187

Student: . . . the apprentice in the arts . . . becoming good by doing just acts. How does
one . . .
LS: Well, in becoming—
Student: One can readily conceive of an apprentice shoemaker going and learning the
shoemaking art from a teacher, but apparently there is a rational principle as far as—that
can be easily transferred from . . . to doing the practice of the art. But it is more difficult
on the other side . . . for the man who is becoming just.
LS: Why is it more difficult? I ask you. I admit the fact, but why is it more difficult?
Same Student: . . . in terms of practice, it is the occasion for exercizing the shoemaking
art. There seems no problem about that because . . . doing just acts . . .
LS: Could we not say we must try to be good sports, as I always say? Take the simple
case, the boy whom we want to be a shoemaker: we send him to a good shoemaker, don’t
we? And if possible, even to a good shoemaker who is a tolerably good man, because he
might do some harm to our boy if he were only a good shoemaker and a bad man. But
what would we do to our boy whom we want to make a good man? To whom do we send
him? To a master of the art of being good. Yes? To a good man. And apparently it is less
easy to find good men than good shoemakers. And the reason [is that] there is a premium
in all societies on the appearance of being a good man, and you get exactly the same prize
if you only appear to be good and if you are good. That is at least a possible
interpretation. And you recognize a well-known Socratic question: where do we find
these men, these teachers of virtue? That is true. And Aristotle disregards this here for the
time being, or we can say he leaves it for the time being at a simplistic identification of
the men who are thought to be good people with the truly good people.
Same Student: I was thinking of perhaps a lesser problem . . . Supposing he found a
good man . . . good teacher . . . student. How—I can envisage the master shoemaker
saying, “You should cut the sole in this way,” or pointing to certain technical
procedures, but the good man . . . ask for the students . . .
LS: Does he do what?
Same Student: Does he pick and choose certain activities for the student?
LS: The questions come up. We are always confronted with examples. For example, now
almost tax time:5 he could tell the boy how to make his tax declaration. And what he does
with borderline cases, whether he will make a ruthless use of these borderline cases to his
own benefit or whether he will rather say: I will act on the principle that the borderline
cases have to be decided in favor of the Internal Revenue authorities. And any other
questions. Or he sells a pair of shoes and he sees there is certain difference between the
price of the raw material and labor and the price for the shoes. Is the price difference
atrocious, or is it only moderate? Any other thing could happen at any moment. I leave it

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

188

to your imagination or to your knowledge of literature to think of all the cases which
could arise in the relation between the apprentice of a shoemaker and a master shoemaker
who is at the same time a good man. That is what you had in mind, was it not?
Same Student: I can conceive of . . . it appears to be beneficial to lie and cheat or it
appears to be beneficial to the shoemaker to be honest at all times . . . but the opportunity
for being just and the slow and right way of proceeding and bringing the soul . . . there
doesn’t seem to be a readily acceptable occasion . . .
LS: No, well, there are various stages; for example, the [deeds of] justice required of a
man who will always remain a private citizen are less interesting than those which would
confront a man in public office—a judge in particular—and so on. Surely. Or in any
political question which concerns a man not merely as a private individual but as
participating in legislating, if only by his vote. Surely. But therefore there are also
discussions all the time. These discussions are never free from considerations of justice,
and by listening to them and judging the different—looking at the men who present the
various issues with perhaps equal rhetorical force, one gradually may acquire some
judgment in these matters, so that one does not have to depend entirely on what one’s
master-shoemaker or master-human being tells us. But to begin with, we of course
believe our parents, that goes without saying, and the boy who comes to the shoemaker
has already some notions of right and wrong which he did not hear from the shoemaker.
And his notions may even lead him to take great distrust of what the shoemaker tells him
as to what it is to be a good man. Obviously. Yes?
Student: With respect to shoemaking, are there some arts that sort of form the straight
line of the base of all the other arts? In other words, are there certain different orders of
arts? The warrior’s art: there are certain arts that are specifically concerned with leading
up to the warrior’s art, but we can’t say that a warrior is a good warrior unless he
possesses the virtue of courage. Now if a man is a shoemaker, it seems that he has a
certain kind of relationship with all the other arts. In other words, shoemaking is required
for a warrior. A doctor, lawyer, philosopher, or politician must wear shoes. And yet it
also seems that all the carpenter—well, not the carpenter, but all the shoemaker can do is
[to] be a good shoemaker. In other words, is his profession, being at the lowest level not
connected with a specific virtue, but its only virtue being the thing in itself.
LS: Oh no. Very simply, every art of this kind is accompanied by an art permeating all
arts, and that is the moneymaking art: the shoemaker makes shoes in order to acquire
money. And this moneymaking art is most obviously subject to justice because, as you
will surely know, you can make money justly and unjustly. But this does not affect him
as a shoemaker but, one could say, as a human being in need of income. And this applies
to all men in one way or the other.
Student: That brings up the question that if every art is related to something lower, the
needs to sustain life, cannot every art be also related to something higher? For example,
the shoemaker, if he is to be a good shoemaker, must follow a certain regimen during the
day: get up early in the morning, work hard, and train himself according—he must know

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

189

how to train himself. So must a good sculptor, and a good sculptor must acquire certain
work habits, as so must a good man.
LS: Yes, but that is not the Aristotelian point. I can easily visualize a shoemaker’s shop
where you find, the whole morning, at any rate, a sign, “Do not disturb,” or whatever he
might choose to write there. [Laughter] And yet what he does,6 the shoes which he
makes, or for that matter repairs, would be excellently done. That’s possible.
Student: Yes, well it’s possible, but a man who had enough moral fortitude, say, to go
out, run, and train himself to be an excellent runner, would also probably have enough
moral fortitude to study and to be—
LS: That is by no means necessary. I do not have the statistics. There must be statistics
about the athletic students and the academic students, whether all athletic students are
first-rate academic students and vice versa. I have a feeling that this is not true
empirically. [Laughter]
Same Student: I was not thinking—I’m getting ahead of myself. Isn’t there a kind of
activity that is required for excellence in the various professions that is interchangeable?
A good man in one field—this is empirically provable—can be transferred to another
field, and he would do a very good job there. A lax man will be a lax man no matter
where he is.
LS: Now that is—in order to seek with greater clarity, let us make a projection of your
suggestion into the most succinct form. Then it means virtue is knowledge; what Socrates
said. The case which you made can be made even more strongly for this general
proposition. But also Socrates got into troubles, because we know of cases of men who
had very great knowledge and were not very virtuous, and some people who were not
men of great knowledge who were very decent and just. So that it is not so simple. And I
think for practical purposes—and Aristotle wrote for practical purposes, as he [tells] us
all the time—the distinction between the arts and the virtues is meaningful. And if it is
not quite exact (that is what bothers you), Aristotle has warned you in advance. It cannot
be quite exact, given the complexity and changeability of human affairs.
Now shall we read a bit more? Aristotle was discussing here, proving that one can do the
just things without being just; therefore one can become just by doing the just things. The
simple analogy of apprentice and master clarifies the situation. Let us read b12 now.
Reader:
But the many—xxv
—xxvihealth of body.
LS: So again, I think it is something very elementary and commonsensical. If you don’t
do the good things, you will never become good. If you only sit in on seminars or lecture
xxv
xxvi

In Rackham’s translation: “the mass of mankind.”
The tape was changed at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

190

courses on goodness [laughter], then you won’t become good by this way. This is of
course directed against what Socrates explicitly says. I remind you again of a statement
of Xenophon in the Memorabilia, book 4, chapter 6, section 6, where Socrates has the
confidence to say: “The just men are those who know the laws about human beings”—as
if at least the mouthpieces of the gangsters did not have as good a knowledge of the laws
regarding human beings as the most honest men in the community had, which is of
course a caricature of what Socrates meant. But Aristotle avoids even these caricatures.
The doing of good things, not the knowing of them, makes us good.
Now Aristotle has now completed his previous discussion of how we become good. And
then he says, at the beginning of the next chapter: thereafter we have to consider what
virtue is. This seems to be in apparent contradiction with what he said before, namely,
that we do not make our investigation in order to know what virtue is. Of course we do
not make this investigation in order to know what virtue is, but nevertheless, we have to
know what virtue is, otherwise we cannot know how to become virtuous in a clear and
solid manner. But Aristotle has inverted that true order in order to bring out the fact that it
is not the knowledge of what virtue is but the doing of what virtue is which makes us
virtuous. So this is no difficulty. Yes?
Reader:
Three things come to be in the soul: emotion, capacity, and disposition. Virtue must be
one of these.xxvii By the emotions, I mean desire, anger, fear, confidence, envy, joy,
friendship, hatred, longing, jealousy, pity; and generally those states xxviii which are
accompanied by pleasure or pain. The capacities are the faculties in virtue of which we
can be said to be liable to the emotions, for example, capable of feeling anger or pain or
pity. The dispositions are the formed states of character in virtue of which we are well or
ill disposed in respect of the emotions; for instance, we have a bad disposition in regard
to anger if we are disposed to get angry too violently or not violently enough, a good
disposition if we habitually feel a moderate amount of anger; and similarly in respect of
the other emotions. (1105b12-28)
LS: Yes. Now let us stop here. Virtue can be only one of these three things. Aristotle
doesn’t mean to say that these are the only three things which come into being in the soul,
but the only three things which are of any relevance in this respect, which could
conceivably be the beginnings of good or bad actions. Now the distinction is clear, I
think: the affections or passions—how did he7 [translate] “abilities,” “faculties”?
Student: “Capacities.”
LS: All right, dynamis. And the third is the hexis: “habit,” translated. The Greek word
hexis comes from the verb echein, which means “to have,” “to hold,” “to keep,” and can
therefore mean derivatively also “to keep or have a posture toward.” And that is what
Aristotle means here by a habit: to have and keep a posture toward the affections. So
xxvii

In Rackham’s translation: “A state of soul is either (1) an emotion, (2) a capacity, or (3) a
disposition; virtue therefore must be one of these three things.”
xxviii
In Rackham’s translation: “states of consciousness.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

191

virtue and vice cannot be affections or passions but can only lie in the posture towards the
passions. In modern times, some philosophers have tried to discover a passion which as
such would be the root of all goodness. The most famous of these passions in modern
times is of course compassion.xxix For Aristotle, compassion is only one of the many
passions, which as such has nothing to do with virtue and vice because we have to see
with whom to have compassion and under what circumstances. To be compassionate as
such is not a virtue. And the same applies also here; for example, love or friendship (in
Greek, the same word): of whom, under what circumstances, at what times, etc.? Yes?
Reader:
Now the virtues and vices are not emotions because we are not pronounced good or bad
according to our emotions, but we are according to our virtues and vices; nor are we
either praised or blamed for our emotions—a man is not praised for being frightened or
angry, nor is he blamed for being angry merely, but for being angry in a certain way—but
we are praised or blamed for our virtues and vices. Again—
LS: Is this clear? So the virtues and vices cannot be found in the passions, or affections,
or emotions because we do not praise a man [for these]; we say he’s given to anger or is
perfectly free from anger. And the latter would not be a term of praise, because there are
occasions, as we said before, when we ought to be angry. Yes?
Reader:
Again, we are not angry or afraid from choice, but the virtues are certain kinds xxx
of choice, or at all events not without choice. xxxi Moreover, we are said to be
‘moved’ by the emotions, whereas in respect of the virtues and vices we are not
said to be ‘moved’ but to be ‘disposed’ in a certain way.
And the same considerations also prove that the virtues and vices are not
capacities; since we are not pronounced good or bad, praised or blamed, merely
by reason of our capacity for emotion. Again, we possess certain capacities by
nature, but we are not born good or bad by nature: of this however we spoke
before.
If then the virtues are neither emotions nor capacities, it remains that they are
dispositions.
Thus we have stated what virtue is generically. (1105b28-1106a13)
LS: “According to its genus.” Virtue or vice are habits. Now we have to find out, as he
says immediately afterward—we have to know not only the genus but also the species.
And that he will show in the sequel. Virtue is a habit, but this must be rightly understood.
Vice also is a habit. So if we say smoking is a habit, according to Aristotelian reasoning it
is, namely, a bad habit, a vice. But we can say vice is an enslaving habit. Virtue is a
xxix

See especially Gotthold Ephraim Lessing, Hamburg Dramaturgy (1767-1769), §§74-80.
In Rackham’s translation: “certain modes.”
xxxi
In Rackham’s translation: “involve choice.”
xxx

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

192

liberating habit. Both the enslaving and the liberating habits are postures, habitual
postures toward the various affections or passions. That’s the main point which Aristotle
makes. Aristotle gives here, as you have seen, a rather detailed discussion [of] why the
virtues cannot be passions, nor faculties or powers, potencies.
Virtue is an acquired freedom, an acquired mastery. And therefore the example of the
shoemaker’s apprentice and the master shoemaker was not so far-fetched. It brings out
something of what Aristotle says. Only an acquired mastery regarding the passions is
somehow more impressive than to have acquired the mastery of the art of the shoemaker
or of the carpenter, and perhaps even of that of the sculptor and painter; although in this
respect there is a great difference between the ancients and the moderns: for Aristotle and
the classics altogether, the so-called imitative arts, like sculpture and painting, are still
arts, productive arts, lower than moral virtue and surely lower than understanding,
wisdom, philosophy.
We must never forget that there is no such a thing8 [as] aesthetics in classical antiquity.
This term was coined by a German professor of philosophy in the late eighteenth
century.xxxii This science didn’t exist [in antiquity]. But originally aesthetics did not mean
the philosophic understanding of arts, of the fine arts, but it meant the philosophic
understanding of the beautiful. And where is it written that the beautiful exists only by
virtue of the fine arts? For the ancients, beauty was found in the first place in natural
beings, and not necessarily in a particularly beautiful rose or so, but in human beings, and
compared with which the beauty created by a portrait painter or by a sculptor was very
defective. After all, neither a painter nor a sculptor can make a beautiful human being,
living and walking around, speaking, and having all kinds of surprises for us in store.
What happened in modern times, say, in the early nineteenth century, was that what is
beautiful by nature was thrown out from aesthetics and only the beautiful by art, i.e., by
the fine arts, was being considered. And that is the meaning of aesthetics now. And then
there was a further step taken in the nineteenth century. Some man wrote a book,
Aesthetics of the Ugly.xxxiii And today one can safely say that aesthetics has nothing
whatsoever to do with the beautiful anymore, but it has to do with works of art. That still
remains at the end of the process. The ancients were in this respect, as well as in many
others, much more “naïve” than we are or, in other words, nearer to nature. xxxiv But this
subject we will take up from time to time.
We will begin with the next chapter [on] Wednesday.xxxv

xxxii

The term acquired its modern sense in the work of Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten (17141762), who first used it in his Meditationes philosophicae de nonnullis ad poema pertinentibus
(1735).
xxxiii
Johann Karl Friedrich Rosenkranz, Ästhetik des Häßlichen (Königsberg: Gebrüder
Bornträger, 1853). See Karl Rosenkranz, Aesthetics of Ugliness: A Critical Edition, trans. Andrei
Pop and Mechtild Widrich (London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2015).
xxxiv
See part 1 of Friedrich Schiller, On Naïve and Sentimental Poetry (1795-1796).
xxxv
Strauss concludes with remarks about student papers. These have been omitted.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 11

1

Deleted “and.”
Deleted “for.”
3
Deleted “with.”
4
Deleted “What is likely any proper prudence likely to occur.”
5
Deleted “and.”
6
Deleted “but.”
7
Deleted “say.”
8
Deleted “like.”
2

193

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

194

Session 12: March 20, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —the habitual mastery of them, and this mastery is
accompanied by a specific pleasure deriving from that very mastery. Some of you will
have read Plato’s Phaedrus, in which the same subject is discussed in the following
form.i The human soul is compared to a chariot and a charioteer, and there are two
horses. The two horses are the passions, and the charioteer is reason. Reason restrains or
impels the passions, whatever the case may be. But it is not the servant of the passions.
Now this statement made by Aristotle gives us only the genus of virtue: virtue is a habit.
But in order to know what a thing is, we have to know not only the genus but also the
specific difference. In the case of man, it’s not sufficient to know that he is a living being,
because dogs and cats are also living beings, but [we need to know] the specific
difference of man, namely, [that he is] the living being which possesses reason. And the
same specification is needed regarding virtue. And I think at this point we begin in
1106a14.
Reader:
But it is not enough merely to say that it is a disposition.ii
LS: “It,” namely, virtue. I translate it “habit,” what he translates by “disposition.”
Reader:
We must also say what sort it is.iii
LS: “What kind of,” “what sort of” a habit it is.
Reader:
It must then be said that all virtueiv has a twofold effect on the thing to which it belongs:
it not only renders the thing itself good, but it also causes it to perform its workv well. For
example, the virtue of the eye makes the eye good and makes its work good, since by the
virtue of the eye, we see well.vi (1106a14-19)
LS: We see well, seeing being the work of the eye.
Reader:

i

Plato, Phaedrus 246a-256a.
In Rackham’s translation: “merely to define virtue generically as a disposition.”
iii
In Rackham’s translation: “we must also say what species of disposition it is.”
iv
In Rackham’s translation: “It must then be premised that all excellence.”
v
In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
vi
In Rackham’s translation: “For example, the effect of excellence in the eye is that the eye is
good and functions well; since having good eyes means having good sight.”
ii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

195

Similarly virtuevii in a horse makes it a good horse, and also good at galloping, at carrying
its rider, and at facing the enemy. If therefore this is true of all things, virtue viii in a man
will be the habitix which renders him a good man and also which will cause him to
perform his workx well. (1106a19-24)
LS: Yes. Now the specific difference of virtue [is this]: virtue is a habit which makes
men good or through which men are good, through which1 [a man] does the work of man
well. The example of the horse given here is characteristic of Aristotle. The horse is
understood as an animal serving man, and we modern people would raise the question:
well, is not an animal serving man, namely, a domesticated animal, inferior to the animal
in its state of nature? And you know the many things which can be said about
domestication. But for Aristotle that is not so, because the animal which serves man
participates, if in a remote way (but in a non-negligible way), in rationality. He does
certain things which are reasonable to do; I mean, assuming that waging war and the
other things are reasonable, as Aristotle indeed assumes. So the animals which can be
domesticated are higher from this point of view than a king of animals who cannot be
domesticated.
Student: Would you say then that the horse is more natural after it is domesticated?
LS: In one sense, yes; in another, no. I mean, insofar as to live according to reason or in
the service of reason is more natural than not to be in such service, one could say the
domesticated animal has reached its nature and is in this sense in a state of nature. That is
simply what Aristotle implies. Yes?
Reader:
We have already indicated what this means; but it will throw more light on the
subject if we consider what the nature of virtue is. xi
Now of everything that is continuous and divisible, it is possible to take the larger
part, or the smaller part, or an equal part, and these parts may be larger, smaller,
and equal either with respect to the thing itself or relatively to us; the equal part
being a mean between excess and deficiency. By the mean of the thing I denote a
point equally distant from either extreme, which is one and the same for
everybody; by the mean relative to us, that amount which is neither too much nor
too little, and this is not one and the same for everybody. For example, let 10 be
many and 2 few; then one takes the mean with respect to the thing if one takes 6;
since 6 – 2 = 10 – 6, and this is the mean according to arithmetical proportion. But
we cannot arrive by this method at the mean relative to us. Suppose that 10
pounds of food is a large ration for anybody and 2 pounds a small one: it does not
follow that a trainer will prescribe 6 pounds, for perhaps even this will be a large
vii

In Rackham’s translation: “excellence.”
In Rackham’s translation: “excellence or virtue.”
ix
In Rackham’s translation: “disposition.”
x
In Rackham’s translation: “function.”
xi
In Rackham’s translation: “what constitutes the specific nature of virtue.”
viii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

196

ration, or a small one, for the particular athlete who is to receive it; it is a small
ration for a Milo, but a large one for a man just beginning to go in for athletics.
And similarly with the amount of running or wrestling exercise to be taken. In the
same way then an expert in any art avoids excess and deficiency, and seeks and
adopts the mean—the mean, that is, not of the thing but relative to us.
LS: Yes. Now what does goodness mean?, Aristotle asks now. And he says it is the
equal, the equal in the sense of the mean between the too much and the too little. But
“mean” can be understood in two ways. First, according to arithmetical proportion, as
Aristotle says: six is the mean between ten and two. But this is not what we are concerned
with in moral matters, because in moral matters we look for the mean with a view to us:
what is too much for us and too little for us, and therefore also what is the right mean
with a view to us. So here we have to consider not only the things but ourselves.
Therefore there is a geometric proportion. Another link enters the proportion. The case is
similar to that of what is sanitary or healthy for the body: that depends very much on the
individual, and it depends very much on the circumstances; and therefore this
complication. Yes?
Reader:
If therefore the way in which every sciencexii performs its work well is by looking to the
mean and applying that as a standard to its productions (hence the common remark about
a perfect work of art, that you could not take from it nor add to it—meaning that excess
and deficiency destroy perfection, while adherence to the mean preserves it)—if then, as
we say, good craftsmen look to the mean as they work, and if virtue, like nature, is more
accurate and better than any form of art, it will follow that virtue has the quality of hitting
the mean. (1106a24-b16)
LS: Yes. Now in the case of the arts, that is good from which you cannot take away or to
which you cannot add without spoiling the product. Think of a shoe, or think of a perfect
statue. A perfect book is a book from which you cannot take away anything and to which
you cannot add anything without spoiling it. So here in this case it is clear: the perfection,
the goodness, consists in a mean between too much and too little.
And now he turns from the arts to virtue. Aristotle says [that] virtue and nature are more
exact than any art. What does he mean by that? A good man cannot act badly if he wills,
for his goodness consists precisely in his being unable ever to will to act badly. He is
inclined only towards the end, the proper end, just as is nature. But the artisan can do his
work badly if he wills, and that is even part of his mastership, that he can deliberately
blunder. The inclination to the good work is not part of the artisan; that is alien to him. As
for why virtue is superior to art, one can also consider the following fact: that every art
deals with a partial good (shoemaker, carpenter, physician); and virtue is concerned with
a partial good and with something which is fundamentally a means for other ends. Virtue
is concerned with the end and [is] in this sense more exact. Yes?
Reader:
xii

In Rackham’s translation: “art or science.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

197

I refer to moral virtue, for this is concerned with passionsxiii and actions, in which one can
have excess or deficiency or a due mean. For example, one can be frightened or bold, feel
desire or anger or pity, and experience pleasure and pain in general, either too much or
too little, and in both cases wrongly; whereas to feel these passionsxiv at the right time, on
the right occasion, towards the right people, for the right purpose and in the right manner,
is to feel the best amount of them, which is the mean amount—and the best amount is of
course the mark of virtue. And similarly there can be excess, deficiency, and the mean in
actions. Now virtue is concerned with passions and actions in which excess is in error and
deficiency is blamed, while the mean is praised and prospers, and these both belong to
virtue.xv
LS: Yes. So in other words, it is not only—we have to consider not only what is good
generally speaking, because there is no answer to that question proper, but under what
circumstances. Here the consideration for the circumstances are mentioned: when, and
toward whom, and on what occasions, and for what purpose, and in what manner. And
this action which is good in all these respects is in the mean, as distinguished from excess
or defect. Yes?
Reader:
Virtue, therefore, is a mean state in the sense that it is able to hit the mean. Again, error is
multiform (for evil is a form of the unlimited, as in the Pythagorean imagery, xvi and good
of the limited), whereas success is possible in one way only (which is why it is easy to
fail and difficult to succeed—easy to miss the target and difficult to hit it); so this is
another reason why excess and deficiency are a mark of vice, and observance of the mean
a mark of virtue:
Good men are so simply.
Bad men are so in all kinds of ways.xvii (1106b16-35)
LS: The latter is a verse which Aristotle quotes here. There is in each case only one way
of acting rightly and innumerable ways of doing wrong or badly. That we must keep in
mind. Aristotle is not a relativist. There is one and only one [way] of acting [rightly] in
each situation2, but this doesn’t mean that all men would have to act in this situation in
the same way, because there are different people of different characters, of different
circumstances, and that has to be considered. Yes?
Student: He may not be a relativist, but in a certain way, if we compare him to Socrates
in the Republic, he seems to be, because, I mean, one couldn’t imagine, reading what we

xiii

In Rackham’s translation: “emotions.”
In Rackham’s translation: “feelings.”
xv
In Rackham’s translation: “Now feelings and actions are the objects with which virtue is
concerned; and in feelings and actions excess and deficiency are errors, while the mean amount is
praised, and constitutes success; and to be praised and to be successful are both marks of virtue.”
xvi
In Rackham’s translation: “the old Pythagorean imagery.”
xvii
In Rackham’s translation: “Goodness is simple, badness manifold.”
xiv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

198

are here, that Aristotle would ever make a statement that, say, the philosophic life is 729
times better than the tyrannical life.
LS: Why could he not say that?
Same Student: Do you think he would say that?
LS: He doesn’t say it, but in what way is this relevant for the question of relativism and
nonrelativism?
Same Student: Well, I mean, it seems that he’s going to say [that] everything is relative
to something, say, principles or something, but—
LS: Yes, well, that cannot be avoided, this kind of relativity.
Same Student: I understand that, but that’s something different than saying—you know,
one could imagine that Socrates might have said that philosophy is so-and-so many times
better than apple pie or whatever it is, I mean, because of the way that—
LS: That would not make much sense [laughter] because they are really in every respect
incomparable things, whereas the philosophic life and the tyrannical life, being both ways
of life, are to that extent comparable. And since the one is definitely superior to the other,
one could at least raise the question: how much superior? That Socrates does not mean
this too literally, the number which he gives, can be assumed; but even if we took it
literally, it would not be wholly absurd, for the reason I indicated. As for the “quote
relativism” in the Republic, it is not smaller than that in Aristotle, because while there is a
certain agreement—for example: all are supposed to be just and moderate, all members of
the society, but the justice and moderation of the lower class is not identical with the
justice and moderation of the higher class. So when you say they are all moderate and
just, you overlook for certain reasons the profound difference between the justice which
consists merely in obeying others and the justice which does not consist in obeying other
human beings. And the same applies to moderation. Plato makes a distinction between
genuine virtue and political virtue, and this great difference is covered up, concealed, by
the single term virtue. We will find perhaps some better examples of that.
At any rate, Aristotle has now succeeded in giving a complete definition of virtue, telling
us not only what the genus is to which virtue belongs, the genus being habit, but also
what kind of a habit. And that he will repeat at the beginning of the next chapter. Will
you read that, please?
Reader:
Virtue then is a purposive habit being in the mean relative to us; thus being determined
by reason and as the prudent man would determine it.xviii (1106b36-1107a2)
xviii

In Rackham’s translation: “Virtue then is a settled disposition of the mind determining the
choice of actions and emotions, consisting essentially in the observance of the mean relative to
us, this being determined by principle, that is, as the prudent man would determine it.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

199

LS: Yes. “Virtue is a habit of preferring” is perhaps a more literal translation and is in the
middle with a view to us, meaning not an absolute mean. And this mean is determined by
reason, by logos, and is how a reasonable man would determine it. Aristotle has
mentioned all these ingredients of the final definition but not all with great emphasis. For
example, there was no great emphasis on preferring or choosing, but it was mentioned in
1106a2 to 3.
Now Aristotle says here that this mean “is determined by reason.” But he adds, “how the
reasonable man would determine it.” Why is this necessary? The reason which Aristotle
has here in mind is the reason of the man on the spot. It is not a disembodied reason but
it’s the reasonable man, the man who considers all the circumstances. And the point
which he makes here by implication is this, and this is the reason why he is not a
relativist: all reasonable men, all sensible men would agree3 that the sound action of A is
a good action, regardless of whether one of them is A or not. Is this point clear? There is
an indefinite variety of good actions given the indefinite variety of circumstances and so
on, but there is no variety possible regarding what any sensible man would say regarding
an action in these and these circumstances. Well, let us take any example. Say, we speak
of a perfect hostess confronted with someone suffering from severe bodily defects yet
without making him feel this defect and without drawing the company’s attention to that
defect. She will treat differently an eight year-old girl who has just lost her mother and a
fifty year-old man who has just lost his father. Elementary. But these are the things which
Aristotle has in mind.
Later on Aristotle will say that it is not so much reason but sense perception which
supplies the decision. Now this must be rightly understood. Of course not mere sense
perception in the sense in which we perceive a chair, but something like sense perception.
You cannot tell a man who is color blind what blue or green is. That is unsayable, strictly
speaking. It cannot be defined, it cannot be described. You can give the wavelength, but
the wavelength wouldn’t help a colorblind man to visualize the color. So there is no
substitute for this kind of perception. But, as I said, Aristotle does not mean by perception
here sense perception, but something like sense perception.
Now we have a word which Aristotle uses in this sense and which is still in general use.
We speak of taste; taste being in the first place a sense perception. But we apply it
metaphorically also to the taste which, for example, the perfect hostess has, or which any
man acting well is supposed to have. Even the word feeling, which was so common and is
perhaps still common, at least since the eighteenth century, is of course also primarily a
sense perception, and then transferred to this kind of perception, which no reason can
substitute for. Yes?
Student: . . . I was just wondering if . . . Aristotle . . . analogy
to . . . goodness . . . aesthetic . . .
LS: The analogy to?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

200

Same Student: The difference between taste and the two senses in which we use
“taste” . . . goodness . . . perception but also what we mean—in some ways what we
mean by aesthetic . . .
LS: Yes, but it does not have this peculiar distinction between the beautiful and the good.
When people speak today sometimes of the aesthetic character of Aristotle’s Ethics, they
mean aesthetic in contradistinction to ethical. Therefore the term “aesthetic” is
misleading for this reason. But of course Aristotle does not exclude the possibility that a
man, if he has acted in a very nice manner and appropriate manner in complicated
circumstances, and someone asks him, “Why did you act in this way?” he might perhaps
say, “I don’t know; I just felt that it was the proper thing to do.” And Aristotle does not
exclude the possibility that he would give it further thought. He might be able to give an
explicit reason for what he did apparently “quote instinctively.” But he might also say
that it is rather pedantic to try to spell it out in this manner. But Aristotle does not say
much about this kind of case. Yes?
Another Student: Would the same insight hold, that is, the insight that the judgment of
the goodness and badness of particular actions in particular circumstances is more akin to
sense perception than to reason—would that hold in cases beyond the cases that we’ve
discussed so far? And I’m thinking of cases of, say, the gravest political questions,
questions of war and peace, questions of changing the nature of a regime through
revolution . . . Winston Churchill in World War II. Can that, the same insight regarding
the questions of that nature, or questions of, say, way of life in a larger sense enter into
decisions?
LS: Well, I believe the cases are somewhat different, because what makes decisions of
this kind so difficult is that you do not know the plans and intentions of the enemy, nor
his full strength, because that is of course part of his whole policy: to conceal his
situation, and especially his weaknesses, from the enemy. That is a particular question
here. And is it a praise of a statesman or a politician to say that his policy is delicate? I
don’t think so. There is a famous statement of Burke about this, that refined policy is as
such not good, simply because it is not properly communicable to the large citizen body.
It must be very massive for this purpose. But this delicacy, especially of the social
virtues, that is something for which we would not find an equivalent, but surely there is a
certain kinship. But one must consider also the material on which one works, say, in
refined society on the one hand, and in politics on the other. You only have to think for a
moment of this difference to see that you cannot expect the same kind of niceness in both
spheres. And you only have to read the daily papers: the horrible things which one man
hurls at his opponent; whether true or false, that is not the point. But they are here taken
for granted. And they would be impossible in polite society, and yet in their sphere, they
are all right. Yes?
Student: Can we speak of the ethical basis of politics if that’s where it . . .
LS: The ethical basis of politics does not mean that the level or the sophistication of
politics is the same as that of polite society. Well, Aristotle would go much further in this

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

201

respect than most people would today. To mention only one point, in the Politics he
disapproves of the practice of running for office. Running for office was perfectly
acceptable to all Greek politicians, naturally, just as it is today. In Rome, too; in Rome, it
was called ambitus, meaning canvassing, from which the word ambition is derived. For
Aristotle this is improper, that someone should display his true or alleged virtues, or
conceal his vices and do other things which are unworthy of a perfect gentleman. So
Aristotle would be willing to go very far in the direction which you suggest, but I think
he would still admit that there is a very great difference nevertheless between the political
arena and what can be done in a highly cultivated, small group of men. Yes?
Student: I would like to understand better your statement that
Aristotle . . . ambitus . . . you said . . . also in the light of your statement that there is in
each case only one way of acting rightly . . . we know of situations where—people act in
different ways in similar situations. Many of us have perhaps heard of the Chinese
custom of making a great deal of noise when they eat the soup, when they enjoy the soup,
something that they do among Chinese . . . In the same way, there are many customs
which are different in different places . . . I don’t know how Aristotle would deal with
this. And also this can be carried onto politics. It may be argued that the political regime
may be very desirable for a country, say, for a very open, very free country. A communist
would say that the communist regime in Cuba may be the most desirable way of
government, a proletarian way of government, for developing that country but wouldn’t
be desirable in our situation. This seems to me a situation that has to be seen in a . . . way.
LS: Yes. Well, you suggested a great variety of considerations, and I’m not sure whether
I understood all of them. That different regimes, regimes of different rank, of4 [higher or
lower rank], are necessary or possible for different societies, Aristotle emphasizes as
strongly as any man ever did. There is no difficulty in that. But for the question you
stated at the beginning of your statement, of course we act differently; I mean, different
people act differently in different circumstances. But this may in the first place be due to
the fact that some are good men and others are bad men, and so how the bad men act
should not be a model for us. Now the good man might act differently for different
reasons. First, because his circumstances are different, you know, so that the same good
man would act in one way in circumstances alpha and in another way in circumstances
beta. That is another point. Thirdly, there may be differences which do not cause any
moral difficulty. Differences due to mere customs, to morally indifferent customs: left
driving or right driving. The English are not inferior to the other nations because they
have a different way of driving than the others have, nor are the others inferior to them.
That’s indifferent. These three cases would at least have to be discussed in order to give
an answer to your question, which consisted of quite a few parts, and I’m not sure
whether I have exhausted the parts of [your question]. Mr. Findlay?
Student: What of the case, which is perhaps too common to be used as it is, but when we
suppose that we have have an honest difference of opinion between two good men on the
same case?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

202

LS: From Aristotle’s point of view, that should be impossible because, for example, one
may be better informed than the other. Then the worse informed would of course say that
you have a better judgment and so on. You know? That is what I meant. There is an
infinite variety of decisions to be made, but the sensible men confronted with the same
set of circumstances would all agree as to what is right in these circumstances.
Same Student: But if the men themselves differed, would that enter into the decision?
LS: In what sense? I mean, [if] the one is more experienced, more mature, than the other,
it would make an enormous difference.
Same Student: But let’s say they had different natural dispositions.
LS: This difference they would have overcome by the time they are sensible men. Yes,
this is surely what Aristotle means. Yes?
Student: Is it thoroughly impossible for reasonable men to have smaller irrationalities of
taste, such as one reasonable man might be for blondes and another one might prefer
women with red hair?
LS: Yes. Well, this is morally indifferent.
Same Student: . . . a matter taste and aesthetics. You can extend that to certain tastes in
perhaps drama: one man might be for a certain style of drama, another might dislike it—
both reasonable men. And you can extend this logically to things that are not just morally
indifferent.
LS: Yes, but then you would have to give reasons for that.
Same Student: . . .
LS: Then?
Same Student: Psychology . . .
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: . . . Small irrationalities that cannot be overcome.
LS: This is a point where Aristotle would differ, I think. He would say—
Same Student: Would he say that that’s impossible for that to happen, for reasonable
men to have psychological irrationalities, with blocks?
LS: Well, he is not a sensible man if he has such blocks.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

203

Same Student: Are there any sensible men? [Laughter]
LS: Pardon? Yes, they would say yes. And I think the simplest example which would
occur to them would be Socrates. They would say look at Socrates, a man who was
entirely sensible.
Same Student: . . . Aristotle—
LS: I mean, Socrates had the advantage, the additional advantage, that he had what he
called his daimonion. So he was a privileged man. But still, whether due to his reason
alone or to that divine gift, he was perfectly sensible. That is what Plato tries to show by
presenting him in his dialogues. I mean nothing less than that.
Same Student: Then since Socrates, we have been pretty short on them.
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: Since Socrates, wouldn’t it be reasonable to assume that we have been
pretty short on sensible men?
LS: I’m sorry, I don’t understand.
Same Student: There have been very few sensible men since Socrates.
LS: Well, I mean we mustn’t make the highest demands. But in a general way there are
of course more sensible men, I mean—
Same Student: The line is actually sort of like an arbitrary line. At what point do you
become sensible? At what point do you have . . .
LS: Yes, well, I can only—did not Aristotle provide for that by saying at least three
times: no exact lines can be drawn?
Same Student: . . .
LS: Yes, it is understandable that you want to have exactness, but the question is whether
you—
Same Student: . . .
LS: Still, but this is a point for Plato as well as for Aristotle, and I think one can say for
all premodern philosophers and quite a few modern philosophers up to a certain age:
individuality goes without saying. We all have individualities, but our task consists in
assimilating ourself to something universal, and so to have individual characteristics is
not something to boast of.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

204

Same Student: That was the point. At what point of universal—as we assimilate, about
what point of universals do we become reasonable? What universals, in what fields does
the . . . universals account for reasonability?
LS: That is what Aristotle is speaking about. Virtue is the universal. There are a variety
of virtues, and he will describe each of the virtues while he goes. And then when we are
through [with] that, we will have a notion of what that universal is. Yes?
Another Student: There’s something here that I did not understand, perhaps because of
lack of knowledge of . . . Perhaps you can explain it to me. This seems to me to
contradict Aristotle’s previous rejection of the absolute good, Plato’s idea of the absolute
good. If every reasonable man can agree on the existence of the right way of action, it
would seem to me that we could get enough men in every situation, enough wise men to
agree or . . . And isn’t this very much the same as the idea of the existence of an absolute
good, which . . . Aristotle and Plato can agree on?
LS: No. Let me state it in this perhaps somewhat exaggerated manner in order to make it
quite clear. The idea of the good, as Aristotle presents it here and as most people believe
it is meant, [is] an absolute. For Aristotle, goodness resides in individual actions, in
individual circumstances. So if you want to see what goodness is, you have to look at
individual actions in individual circumstances: there you’ll see goodness. The general
statement is only of some help towards seeing goodness, but it is not the goodness itself.
The goodness itself consists in the concrete action, in the individual action, and therefore
this is something radically different. It is even a greater difference than that between the
ideal dog—the idea of the dog, you know, who doesn’t bark, doesn’t run around—and
this here dog which does all these things and some additional things. And the difference
is even greater, because here there is at least this same dog from the beginning of his life
until its end, whereas here we have the actions in these and these circumstances as the
true place of moral truth. Mr. . . . ?
Student: . . . accept that the gentleman . . he seems to equate sensibleness with—almost
with absolute good, so . . . declare Socrates to be the sensible man. So it naturally follows
that . . . sensible men after Socrates because . . . men do not approach the goodness
of . . . the question I wanted to ask is . . .
LS: Sure, very well, but this means of course that the more sensible man’s judgment is to
be preferred to the less sensible man’s judgment. So there is no relativism in this sense.
Good. Now I think we should now continue where we left off. 1107a2.
Reader:
And it is a mean between two vices, one of excess and one of defect. Furthermore, it is a
mean state in that whereas the vices either fall short of or exceed what is right in passions
and in actions, virtue finds and chooses the mean. xix (1107a2-6)
xix

In Rackham’s translation: “exceed what is right in feelings and in actions, virtue ascertains and
adopts the mean.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

205

LS: “Both” is important: finding the mean and choosing it. If a man is good enough to
find the mean but doesn’t choose it, then he is not a reasonable man. On the other hand,
he cannot choose it without having found 5 [it first]. So it is not preexisting, his choice; he
has to find it. Yes. A man who chooses the right life but is not able to find it by himself is
not truly good. “Virtue is a mean which finds and chooses the mean.” Yes?
Reader:
Hence while in respect of its substance and the definition that states what it is, virtue is
the mean. In point of excellence and rightness, it is an extreme.xx (1107a6-8)
LS: What does this distinction mean? According to what virtue intends, it is a mean;
otherwise, it is a peak. Is this distinction clear? That it is in one respect, and the most
important respect, a mean; but in another respect, which is by no means negligible, it is a
peak. I will give you an example from Aristotle’s Politics. In the Politics, Aristotle has
two ways of discussing the various kinds of regimes. The two considerations: (a) number
of rulers and (b) goodness or badness. He arrives at this schema: kingship, aristocracy,
polity; and at the bad side, tyranny, oligarchy, and democracy. But he has another starting
point which is less visible but no less important, and here he starts from the most
fundamental and common political cleavage, namely, that between the rich and the poor.
Now the regime in which the rich rule is oligarchy, and the regime in which the poor rule
is democracy. Both are from Aristotle’s point of view faulty extremes, and he has to seek
a mean. And as a matter of fact, he finds at least two means on different levels. These
means are in one sense—now the means owe their goodness ultimately to the fact that
they are [a] mean, i.e., not the faulty extremes. If I can perhaps put it at the blackboard.
[LS writes on the blackboard.] If this is democracy, and this is oligarchy . . . so there is a
mean. But Aristotle does not mean this mean, the arithmetic mean, but he means the
mean here, which is higher than the two extremes, by avoiding the mistakes of both
extremes and combining the advantages of the two. And as a matter of fact, in the Politics
it is this way. There are at least three such different means, and the highest would be
aristocracy. Yes?
Student: Well, what relationship would this mean have to the Hegelian synthesis?
LS: Surely none [laughter] from Hegel’s point of view. But if we want to be clever, we
might say that what Hegel had in mind by a synthesis is indeed, has a certain kinship
[with the Aristotelian mean], because the key point of the Hegelian synthesis is of course
that the original level, the level of the original antithesis, is given up in favor of a higher
level. To that extent you are right. But I do not know whether it is—it might be of some
help, perhaps, for the understanding of Hegel to think of it. Your question is by no means
unreasonable, but surely the question didn’t exist for Aristotle in this form. He would
never call this a dialectical process. And I do not think that it played any role in the
formation of Hegel’s thought regarding dialectics, especially since for Aristotle the
principle of contradiction is absolutely sacred, whereas for Hegel’s dialectics it is not
sacred. That is a great difference, isn’t it? Yes.
xx

In Rackham’s translation: “the definition that states what it really is in essence virtue is the
observance of the mean, in point of excellence and rightness it is extreme.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

206

Now there is one point which I thought we should consider for one moment. The essence
of virtue is, to repeat, mean, or mediocrity: mediocrity in the sense in which Horace
speaks of golden mediocrity (aurea mediocritas).xxi But the point is for Aristotle that this
golden mediocrity is not mediocre but is a peak. Virtue is the mean because virtue
belongs to the same genus as the vices, as we have seen before. It is the right habit
towards the passion in question, whereas the vices are the wrong habits. But both have to
deal with the same habits, and therefore they belong to the same genus. So the true
extremes are the virtues and the vices. But the vice does not intend to be bad, the bad as
bad: it intends one or the other extreme as good, say, the coward does not intend
cowardly action as cowardly action but as good, namely, with a view to saving his life,
whereas the virtue intends the mean explicitly as good.
Now I think we should consider at this moment a critique of Aristotle’s doctrine of
mediocrity given in modern times, by Thomas Hobbes. I have this passage in his book
On the Citizen, chapter 3, section 32. He says:
“Moral philosophers have not observed that the goodness of actions consists in this, that
they are directed toward peace, and badness consists in this, that they are directed toward
or leading up to concord.xxii For this reason, they have founded a moral philosophy which
is wholly alien to the moral law and not consistent with itself. For they wanted that the
nature of virtue consisted in some mean between two extremes, and the vices, however,
in these very extremes. And this is manifestly wrong, for daring is praised and regarded
as a virtue under the name of courage, although it is extreme, provided the cause of the
daring is approved. The quantity of a thing, which is used as a gift, regardless of whether
the quantity is great or small or mean, does not make liberality, but the cause of the
giving [meaning whether it is given ultimately with a view to peace or ultimately with a
view to conduct—LS] nor is it injustice if I give to someone of my own more than is
due.”xxiii
Now the latter point is of course based on a whole misunderstanding, because for
Aristotle, if you give more to a man than you owe, you are of course not unjust. In other
words, justice is the only virtue which has not two faulty extremes but only one, namely,
injustice. So Hobbes should have known that, but he didn’t. Now in the other case,
Aristotle is of course aware of that, that the cause [of daring] must be approved6. And
then indeed the daring may be extreme if the cause is good, but other things also have to
be considered. It is a very inadequate argument, but not unpopular in his century, because
Hugo Grotius, in his great work On the Right of War and Peace, makes a similar
criticism. Shall we go on at this point?
Reader:

xxi

Horace, Odes 2.10.5.
In original: “discordiam.”
xxiii
Presumably Strauss’s translation. Thomas Hobbes, De Cive (1642), chapter 3, section 32.
xxii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

207

Not every action or passionxxiv however admits of the observance of a mean. xxv Indeed the
very names of some directly imply evil, for instance delight at evil, xxvi shamelessness,
envy, and, of actions, adultery, theft, murder. All these and similar actions and
passionsxxvii are blamed as being bad in themselves; it is not the excess or deficiency of
them that we blame. It is impossible therefore ever to go right in regard to them—one
must always be wrong; nor does right or wrong in their case depend on the
circumstances, for instance, whether one commits adultery with the right woman, at the
right time, in the right wayxxviii [laughter]; the mere commission of any of them is wrong.
One might as well suppose there could be a meanxxix and an excess and deficiency in acts
of injustice or cowardice or profligacy, which would imply that one could have a medium
amount of excess and of deficiency, an excessive amount of excess and a deficient
amount of deficiency.xxx But just as there can be no excess or deficiency in moderation xxxi
and justice, because the mean is in a sense an extreme, so there can be no observance of
the mean nor excess nor deficiency in the corresponding vicious acts mentioned above,
but however they are committed, they are wrong; since, to put it in general terms, there is
no such thing as observing a mean in excess or deficiency, nor as exceeding or falling
short in the observance of a mean. (1107a8-27)
LS: Ya. Now this is a remarkable passage. There are actions and passions, Aristotle says
here, that are simply bad and regarding which there cannot be a right mean, an excess or
a defect. And one cannot say, for example, as a classical Greek author says of the
Spartans, “They taught their boys to steal well,” meaning: so that they would not be
caught.xxxii This could be used only in a metaphoric sense, namely, insofar as you can
speak of a good safecracker and of similar things. Just as there cannot be an excess or
defect of the virtues themselves, one cannot be moderately virtuous or moderately
vicious. Surely not moderately virtuous: either you are virtuous; then you are wholly and
not moderately. The alternative would be something like Machiavelli, who spoke of a
middle way, using an Aristotelian expression, la via del mezzo. But he understood by the
middle way, sometimes at least, a middle way between virtue and vice, by which you
have the best of both worlds. But here is the question; there is a difficulty of which some
of you will have been aware. How does Aristotle know that these things he mentions here
are base or bad? How does he know that? After all, this is meant to be a philosophic
book, and therefore the question must be raised. Yes?
Student: . . .

xxiv

In Rackham’s translation: “emotion.”
In Rackham’s translation: “a due mean.”
xxvi
In Rackham’s translation: “malice.”
xxvii
In Rackham’s translation: “feelings.”
xxviii
In Rackham’s translation: “right manner.”
xxix
In Rackham’s translation: “a due mean.”
xxx
In Rackham’s translation: “temperance.”
xxxi
In Rackham’s translation: “temperance.”
xxxii
Plutarch, Lives, “Lycurgus.”
xxv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

208

LS: Yes. Everyone who is not corrupted by self-interest would admit that, but if you
want a reason, Aristotle would say: Yes, well, what would happen if these things were
changed? Since he proves in his Politics later on that private property is needed and that
the monogamous family is needed in order to have a good society, these prohibitions
follow as a matter of course. Yes?
Student: . . . that this might be a strange example, but at beginning of the Phaedrus kind
of argument . . . the argument that’s made in favor of the non-lover, which is sort of, in a
curious way, arguing for moderation in terms of erōs and Socrates is arguing against that
but from a different claim . . .
LS: Yes, but is not the moderation regarding erōs exactly what people understand by
moderation, sōphrosynē? Is this not in a way the most important part of moderation, more
important than moderation regarding food and drink?
Same Student: Well, yes, but . . . I would agree but I was thinking that
something . . . virtue . . . peace . . . about arguing for moderation and things that . . .
LS: Well, the only thing I can say here—and this is a very long question, the Phaedrus—
is this: I think Socrates is working his way toward the following distinction. There is one
sphere in which to be moderate is absurd, and that’s philosophy. If you say of a man, “He
is a moderate philosopher,” that is not a true philosopher. But another thing is speech,
speech as distinguished from thinking, and speech must be moderate. The whole work,
the Phaedrus, deals with with erotic speeches, and therefore with the two ingredients: (a)
erōs; (b) speech. Speech must be moderate, but thinking cannot be moderate if it is true
thinking. But I cannot—you want to . . .
Student: I was going to say, how about “moderation in pursuit of justice is no vice”?
LS: No. Moderation in pursuit of justice is vice according to what Aristotle says. Is vice.
Yes, Aristotle would say—I remind you again of this famous . . . virtue is an extreme; at
the same time a peak, a high extreme. What you mean by it, whether political action
should not be prudent: Aristotle will of course say yes, but that does not mean [that] this
precisely is a just thing. The man who is concerned with what is feasible without
violence or bloodshed and so on, he precisely is a more just man than a man who, in the
name of justice . . .xxxiii and it leads to civil war. That is what he would say. Mr. . . .
Student: Aren’t some crimes more vicious than other crimes of the same kind?
LS: Sure, sure.
Same Student: And doesn’t that imply an excess and deficiency of some kind, if only
analogously?
LS: No, one would safely say petty theft is less bad than murder.
xxxiii

There is a brief gap in the tape here.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

209

Same Student: But let’s just take two murders. Couldn’t one murder be worse than
another?
LS: Sure, naturally. But that doesn’t do away with the fact that they are in both cases
murder and crimes.
Same Student: I understand, but the point here is that there is no excess and deficiency
with respect to certain kinds of action.
LS: Yes, as Aristotle said: you cannot raise the question, say, murder committed under
such and such circumstances is good. That you can never say. You can only say murder
committed in such and such circumstances is more excusable than murder done under
other circumstances. But what is excusable is of course in need of excuse. It is bad. This
would cause no difficulty. There is a great difficulty here, to which I will come, but not—
you wanted to say something?
Student: I was interested in one statement about murder being bad no matter . . . I
think . . . an idea perhaps . . . brought up before in respect to theft, murder or . . . you
say . . . are bad, period. I think . . . the idea, the fact that theft can—
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: Theft can be good. Murder can be good. Do you think he would deny
this?
LS: Yes, absolutely, he denied it here.
Same Student: But if your neighbor is insane and has a gun in his house?
LS: Yes, but then it is not murder. Then it is not theft.
Same Student: Theft’s theft, is it not?
LS: No. I’m aware of this question, but I will come to it very soon. But now let me—the
difficulty in terms of Aristotle’s text is this. You remember that he had spoken in an
earlier passage, 1104a3 to 6, of the fact that in moral matters not even the universal
statements, or the general statements, are simply exact or true. There is nothing stable in
this view. Now are the things he mentioned here—murder and so on—not universal
things of the greatest exactness? Do these rules not say simply: “Thou shalt not murder.
Period. No ifs, no buts,” as we all have heard it or as we all understand it, although such
questions as you raised will come up? Now what is the difficulty? I mean, Aristotle says
murder is always bad, but if we take such a case as you referred to, say, the mad man
with the gun, it might be necessary to kill him or it might be necessary to take away the
gun. You remember, that’s the beginning of the discussion in Plato’s Republic. You
know? That is the first question coming up in the Republic. Now what is the answer of

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

210

Plato and Aristotle and of many men since? Well, this would not be murder, nor would it
be theft, because it is always understood—take the simple case which Plato discusses: a
man has borrowed from you a gun, and then in the meantime he has become insane, and
then he comes to you and wants his gun. And it would seem to be only just to return the
gun to him, and yet you don’t do it, because why? There is another principle to which
you refer, tacitly or explicitly: justice must be good, salutary. Now if the just action, the
seemingly just action, is in the circumstances not salutary but harmful, then you must not
do it. The legislator may spell this out in more precise terms, or he may fail to do so. At
any rate, our judgment would be guided by the consideration that all virtues must be
salutary. And therefore if the action apparently dictated by justice, or courage or
whatever it may be, is patently not salutary, then you must not do it. And of course
salutary does not mean merely salutary to me or to you but to the society at large.
Student: Then these activities are only bad in regard to . . .
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: These activities—murder, theft, or adultery—are just activities, then they
cannot be called bad, whether—
LS: Yes. Well, then we would never call them murder. So you would have to use a
different term. According to the ordinary translation of the Ten Commandments, the Ten
Commandments say: “Thou shalt not kill.” Now that is of course simply the wrong
translation, however old the translation may be, because as you can easily see by reading
the Old Testament, Moses demanded killing in not a few cases, so he cannot have
contradicted himself so grossly in such a matter. So one should translate it “Thou shalt
not murder.” And killing comprises both good and bad killing: murder and nonmurder.
And how to draw the line, that’s a very great difficulty. The example with which the
classics were most familiar is, of course, that of war. I mean, what is done in war, the
killing of enemy soldiers, is not regarded as murder—I mean, except by some people who
have the extreme view that every killing is bad, which is hard to maintain because then it
might also lead to the consequence that one should not kill any other living beings,
including bacilli, and then one comes into certain troubles into which Albert Schweitzer
came with this notion.xxxiv But then the line—for some centuries, it was possible to say
that the killing of enemy soldiers is not murder but killing of enemy civilians is murder.
But with the progress of military technology, this distinction has become inapplicable. Or
take other cases. One cannot deny the legitimacy of espionage. If a man has found
immensely important information, important for his country and its preservation, and is
prevented from bringing it home by a perfectly innocent bystander: if he would push him
away in such a manner that he dies as a consequence of that, is this an evil action? So we
find many, many cases which lead to this consequence.
But we seem to have deviated from Aristotle, but not quite. We find some Aristotelian
evidence that he held this view, the view that there is nothing, no rule of this kind which
is universally valid. There is a notion, known to us through the tradition, which brings out
xxxiv

Albert Schweitzer (1875-1965), German and French minister, scholar, and physician.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

211

this idea that there are principles of actions, rules of actions which are universally valid.
That is called sometimes natural law and natural right. Now Aristotle discusses natural
law and natural right both in his Rhetoric and in a single page of the Nicomachean Ethics.
He gives quite a few examples, some examples of natural law and natural right. None of
these examples here are mentioned there. So the Aristotelian evidence, which shows that
this is not the last word of Aristotle, is supplied by his statements or nonstatements on
natural right and natural law. By “nonstatements” I mean his silences, not in the sense in
which they say now “a non-person,” and so on. Good. Yes. Now let us read the end of
this section.
Reader:
We must not however rest content with stating this in general,xxxv but must show that it
applies to the particular virtues. In practical discussions,xxxvi although general
statements xxxvii have a—xxxviii (1107a28-30)
LS: —action among people of decent breeding and so forth, and make other
specifications. Then we may come to various universally valid statements, where all
sensible men would agree. But we would not find this exactness, the truth, in the rules
themselves. That is the characteristic point.
Now in order to fulfill his promise, Aristotle speaks in the sequel of the various virtues
and vices, the purpose being to show that in each case a virtue is a mean flanked by two
extremes: an excess or a defect. The examples are simple. For example, courage, the
virtue; cowardice on the one hand and over-boldness on the other. In the case of
moderation, i.e., the proper posture towards sensible pleasures, indulgence, [we have]
self-indulgence on the one extreme, and on the other extreme, complete insensitivity to
the pleasures of senses. The right mean is moderation. The same thing applies to other
matters like anger. We have gentleness in the mean, inability to get angry, which is a
defect, and on the other extreme, constant irascibility, a kind of savagery. And so on in all
cases. Now this will be taken up by Aristotle in detail in books 3 and 4, where he
discusses the various virtues.
Now there are a few points—we cannot read this all—but we can perhaps read a few
points. Let us turn to 1108a30.
Reader:
There are also modes of observing a mean in the sphere of and in relation to the
passions.xxxix [For though the sense of shame is not a virtue, it is praised and so is the
modest man.]xl
xxxv

In Rackham’s translation: “this general definition.”
In Rackham’s translation: “practical philosophy.”
xxxvii
In Rackham’s translation: “universal principles.”
xxxviii
The tape was changed at this point.
xxxix
In Rackham’s translation: “emotions.”
xl
The bracketed sentence occurs at the end of this paragraph in Rackham’s text, which deviates
from Bekker.
xxxvi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

212

LS: The “bashful” man. Yes?
Reader:
For in these also, one man is spoken of as bashfulxli and another as excessive—for
example the fearfulxlii man, whose sense of shamexliii takes alarm at everything; while he
that is deficient in shame, or abashed at nothing whatsoever, is shameless, and the man of
middle character is modest or bashful. xliv
Again, Righteous Indignation is the observance of a mean between Envy and delight in
evilxlv—
LS: “Delight in evil.” Some of you will have heard the German word Schadenfreude. The
English language doesn’t have such a word, but the Greek and the German language have
it. Yes?
Reader:
And these qualities are concerned with pain and pleasure felt at the fortunes of one’s
neighbors. The righteously indignant man is pained by undeserved good fortune; the
jealous man exceeds him and is pained by all the good fortune of others; while the man
who delights in evilxlvi so far falls short of being pained that he actually feels pleasure.
(1108a30-b6)
LS: That is the point which Aristotle will make clear later on. He will not discuss the
case of the man of righteous indignation here in this work, at any rate. He will discuss a
sense of shame, and [he] makes it clear that sense of shame is not a virtue because it
presupposes that you make mistakes of which you are ashamed. Now the perfect
gentleman does not make mistakes, and therefore he doesn’t have a sense of shame. So
the sense of shame is fitting only [for] the young, who cannot be supposed to have
reached that pinnacle of propriety of the perfect gentleman. But if we see this
enumeration of the three kinds of men—the men of moral indignation, and the envious
man, and the man who derives pleasure from seeing man in an evil condition, a bad
condition—[we might ask]: is there no one who enjoys the well-being of all men or at
least of all who deserve well-being? Is this not a strange omission in Aristotle?
This is connected with another point. Aristotle discusses here altogether eleven moral
virtues in this enumeration, and in an earlier enumeration of the passions, in 1105b11 to
12, he enumerates eleven passions. One of the passions is compassion or mercy, but there

xli

In Rackham’s translation: “moderate.”
In Rackham’s translation: “bashful.”
xliii
In Rackham’s translation: “whose modesty.”
xliv
In Rackham’s translation: “and the man of middle character modest. For though Modesty is
not a virtue, it is praised, and so is the modest man.”
xlv
In Rackham’s translation: “Malice.”
xlvi
In Rackham’s translation: “the malicious man.”
xlii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

213

is no virtue regarding mercy, regarding the passion of mercy. That is very interesting, and
that is connected with the point I raised before.
Now such a universal benevolence: there is no place for that in Aristotle. I mean, you can
be benevolent only toward people you know, i.e., strictly speaking, your benevolence
cannot be universal. What later on came to be called the virtue of humanity is in Greek
philanthropia, philanthropy, and this is not a virtue. One can perhaps state the classical
view about it as follows: there are some people who like birds, and there are others who
like dogs, and there are also people who like human beings as human beings. That is an
interesting trait, but it is not in itself a virtue, so that the other virtues, like justice, are
much, much more important. You should read the end of book 2, by all means, but we
cannot read it in class. Let us read a few more pages, in 1109b7.
Reader:
We must in everything be most of all on our guard against what is pleasant and against
pleasure; for when pleasure is on the trialxlvii we are not impartial judges. The right course
is therefore to feel towards pleasure as the elders of the people felt toward Helen, and
to—
LS: Let me just say that we can perfectly understand that someone successfully abducted
her. But as far as our city is concerned, the sooner she leaves it, the better. Yes?
Reader:
and to apply their words to her on every occasion; for if we roundly bid her to be
gone, we should be less likely to err.
These then, to sum up the matter, are the precautions that will best enable us to hit
the mean. But perhaps it is a difficult thing to do, and especially in particular
cases: for instance it is not easy to define in what manner and with what people
and on what sort of grounds and how long one ought to be angry; and in fact we
sometimes praise men who err on the side of defect in this matter and call them
gentle, sometimes those who are quick to anger and style them manly. However,
we do not blame one who diverges a little from the right course, whether on the
side of the too much or of the too little. (1109b7-20)
LS: Now this was a question which was raised by some of you: you know, this very great
difficulty to draw a clear line. Yes. And now what is Aristotle’s final decision? The next
sentence, “We see the one who deviates considerably.”
Reader:
But one who diverges more widely we blame, xlviii for his error is noticed.
LS: Yes. It’s “noticed.” That is important. It is noticed of course by other human beings.
The implication here of the whole reasoning is the abstraction from an omniscient god
xlvii
xlviii

In Rackham’s translation: “on her trial.”
In Rackham’s translation: “who diverges more widely, for his error.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

214

who would see everything and judge nicely every deviation, however subtle. We have to
do only with human judgment. Now one can say: well, but if this is so, if there is a certain
crudeness of judgment inevitable in this sphere, how is this compatible with the exactness
of virtue of which Aristotle had spoken before? The answer is given in the immediate
sequel.
Reader:
Yet to what degree and how seriously a man must err to be blamed is not easy to define
on principle. For in fact no—
LS: “Not easy to find by logos,” by a universal or general statement. Yes?
Reader:
For in fact no object of perception is easy to define; and such questions of degree depend
on particular circumstances, and the decision lies with perception. (1109b20-23)
LS: “Aisthēsis,” sense perception, but now understood in an enlarged sense of the word:
taste, feeling. But as I said before, Aristotle does not exclude completely the possibility
that we can in many cases spell out this judgment of taste or feeling and give the precise
reason why we should behave toward X in this situation in this manner and toward Y in
that situation in another manner. That can be done, and that is even, I think, a good
exercise to do that from time to time. Yes?
Student: How does this differ from the modern notions of the theory of moral
sentiments . . .
LS: The question is ultimately this: how do we know the highest principles of conduct?
Do we know them by feeling and only by feeling? That would be the question. There are
two possibilities. For Aristotle, the feelings—or as he would say in this case: the desires,
the longings—are only one part of the moral phenomenon. The other is reason; and
reason may be theoretical or may be practical reason. That is the great difficulty here.
And according to what Aristotle says most visibly in the sixth book, our moral character,
our properly habituated desire, makes us perceive the end, whereas prudence or practical
reason enables us to find the proper means for that end. For example, that courage is
noble and that we desire to be courageous, that we owe to the proper upbringing. But that
we know this action in this circumstance is brave but in other circumstances rash, or for
that matter cowardly, that we are able to see through practical wisdom or prudence. And I
would say that a doctrine of moral sentiments has no place for practical reason. That’s the
difference between them and Aristotle.
Same Student: It works very well in a limited situation.
LS: Yes. Well, that is probably true of every theory, because otherwise it would never
have found any taker at any time. Mr. Zinman?
Mr. Zinman: Is there reason to be exact about these hierarchic virtues?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

215

LS: Well, Aristotle doesn’t raise any particular claim regarding it. He enumerates these
virtues without giving a reason why he proceeds in this manner. Nor does he assert [that]
it is complete. We would have to find out by studying it: is there any principle guiding
the arrangement that you begin with courage and end, at least as far as the moral virtues
are concerned, with justice? Is there any reason? Aristotle doesn’t give them to you, at
least not explicitly; you will have to put quite a few twos together to get some [reason].
But what Aristotle would say, I think, is this: well, if it is not complete, why is it not? Is
anything missing? For example, we would say that we miss an equivalent of the quality
of mercy. Well, in the sense in which it is meant in the Merchant of Venice, Aristotle
would say that he has provided for it by the quality of equity in the section on justice.
And in the other sense, as far as it is a mere passion, commiseration or so, he doesn’t
have a virtue corresponding to that. Then we would have to argue that out, of course, but
he has his reasons. For example, one of the virtues well known in classical antiquity, as
you know from Plato, is piety. Aristotle silently drops it. The task of the interpreter of
Aristotle is to find out the reasons 7 [for] that silence, that silent dropping. Aristotle does
not give them in these terms, but he gives them in a perhaps more indirect way, and one
has to settle for that. That’s the only procedure.
The exactness—I think there is an exactness there. On the whole, it is an ascent, the order
[of the virtues], but this is qualified by other considerations. For example, magnanimity,
which is a very high virtue in Aristotle and has to do with high honors, precedes in this
order the right posture towards small honors, and the right posture towards small honors
would simply be lower in rank than the right posture towards high honors. But the reason
here is that there was no name for the latter virtue, whereas there was a name for the
other: magnanimity. So otherwise, one can say there is an order; generally speaking, it is
an order of ascent. As for the omissions, one has to find out the reasons by considering
the character of the virtues in question.
Student: If it’s an order of ascent, why are the small social virtues after greatness-ofsoul? Like friendliness and—
LS: Yes, there are two ways of understanding it. In a way, they are not as important as
the massive virtues of courage, moderation, proper posture toward money or wealth,
proper posture toward honor. But from another point of view, one could say that they are
higher because they are more refined. The virtues of private social life require a higher
degree of delicacy than the more massive virtues. One could say that. Yes?
Another Student: Aristotle’s notion of the mean seems to be misleading in a certain
way, because it makes it sound plausible . . . question of using these passions in the right
way at the right time?
LS: Yes, sure.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

216

Same Student: So for instance, one man could have more confidence than another man
but be more cowardly, because the confidence would be directed towards the wrong
things.
LS: Yes, but then he is not a virtuous man. Then he is rash or bold, not courageous.
Same Student: Would we say that he is erring on the side of rashness, or erring on the
side of cowardice?
LS: I haven’t heard your precise definition of the case.
Same Student: The man is very confident with regard to certain things, but cowardly or
afraid with regard to things that are most important.
LS: You mean—give me an example. He is cowardly in war, and where is he going with
that? Toward mice? [Laughter] I don’t know what you mean.
Same Student: Suppose he is very confident in his relations to his immediate friends,
and in defending his own opinion he has courage in his convictions but not in the case of
war.
LS: Well, the former is only in a metaphoric sense courage, Aristotle would say, because
by courage we understand primarily the willingness to face death. Now no one faces
death by presenting to his friends his perhaps paradoxical opinions. That has to do with,
how should I say, with his vanity or the absence of vanity. Whether he is afraid to take a
beating or not afraid, that is not the sphere of courage. Yes?
Same Student: Suppose a man is willing to die for his convictions—for instance,
Socrates or Thomas More—but not willing to expose himself to war.
LS: If he is willing to undergo death on the scaffold, then why should he not be able to
undergo death on the field of battle? That might be connected with certain opinions
which he has, namely, that on the scaffold he is only suffering that, but on the field of
battle, he would also dish it out. And then one would have to go into this opinion, which
Aristotle would regard as a wrong opinion, that one should not kill as a universal
prohibition.
Student: But the fact that he has a wrong opinion, this would influence whether or not he
would be judged a virtuous man.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: Even in the sense of courage?
LS: Yes, because it consists of two elements: an element of desire, of proper desire or
proper aversion, and the element of practical wisdom, of prudence. So that if men have

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 12

217

wrong opinions in practical matters, then to that extent they lack prudence. This is
somewhat complicated. I spoke of it on earlier occasion, when I pointed out the difficulty
that in one respect prudence is the queen of action, you know, and sovereign there. And
yet prudence can be endangered by wrong theoretical views, and therefore prudence is in
need of a theoretical defense, namely, of a theoretical refutation of the false opinions. I’m
not responsible for this complication, but we have to face it.
Next time we will begin with book 3, and I hope you will read the end of book 2.
1

Deleted “he.”
Moved “rightly.”
3
Deleted “would agree.”
4
Deleted “differently higher.”
5
Deleted “out it before.”
6
Moved “of daring.”
7
Deleted “of.”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

218

Session 13: March 25, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —of book 2. Let us use this occasion for surveying the first
two books, at least the points which are most important. Now the first theme is, as you
remember, happiness, and we are told that virtue is the core of happiness. The virtuous
man, the spoudaios, derives the highest kind of pleasure from resisting the more common
kind of pleasures and from not ceding to pain. And from this it follows that the virtuous
man can never be simply miserable. Take the example, Priam. So to come back to the
main point, virtue is the core of happiness. Yet happiness, in contradistinction to virtue, is
venerable, whereas virtue is not. Happiness has the status of blessing and belongs to a
higher order. This is one great difficulty of the argument of book 1.
The second point that I would like to remind you of is this: moral knowledge is valuable
only for action, as Aristotle says. Yet it is of higher rank than the knowledge implied in
the arts, the various arts. It is, however—although Aristotle does not say this here yet—
moral knowledge is of lower rank than theoretical knowledge. That will come into the
open in book 6 only.
In 1105a26 following, Aristotle speaks most clearly about the difference between the arts
and the virtues. In the case of the virtues, the choice, selection of the correct must be
made for its own sake, whereas in the case of the arts, the choice—say, of the right kind
of leather—is ultimately made with a view to the gain, profit or however you call it, or
convenience of the artisan.
In 1107a8 and following, Aristotle speaks of universally valid rules of action (or he
seems to speak of them), namely, regarding murder, adultery, and so on. But these rules
would all be negative rules; they wouldn’t be positive rules. [They are] prohibitive rather
than commanding proper. Now this is strange: here we have something general or
universal which seems to be of the utmost exactness, under no circumstances, without
any ifs and buts. But in other passages, like 1107a28 and following, Aristotle says [that]
in actions, the particular utterances, the particular discourses are truer than the general
ones. Is this only a somewhat loose statement abstracting from the remark about not
murdering and so on, or has it to be taken very strictly? I suggested that the solution to
this difficulty has to be found via a consideration of Aristotle’s teaching on natural right
and natural law in the fifth book of the Ethics on the one hand, and in the Rhetoric on the
other.
Now as for the precise definition of virtue, i.e., moral virtue: it has to do with the mean
with a view to us. This causes no difficulty in the example which Aristotle discusses most
clearly, namely, that of moderation, so that the amount of food which a man of three
hundred pounds demands in the prime of his age is different from that which an old man
of one hundred pounds demands. And the same applies to drink and so on. But what
about the other virtues? Is it there so clear that the mean is always with a view to us?
Now the principle to which he defers, if he does not refer, [is this]: in actions, we are

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

219

never merely observers or spectators. We are ourselves involved; therefore there is a
relativity of the correct or noble to the acting human being. For example, is he healthy or
weak? Is he rich or poor, whatever it may be? A simple example, or perhaps a
particularly beautiful example of that is that given by Aristotle at the beginning of the
discussion of magnanimity. A magnanimous man is a man who demands for himself high
honors while deserving them, say, a man like Churchill, if he had demanded high honors
for himself. But if he demands high honors for himself without deserving them, that is a
deplorable case. But there is another case: that a man does not demand high honors for
himself and he doesn’t deserve high honors. Aristotle is not a vicious man; Aristotle says
he’s “sōphrōn,” which in this context we could translate by “modest.” The magnanimous
man is not modest according to conventional notions of modesty. But if someone has no
merits and knows it and acts on it, then he is a modest and sensible man. So we see here a
relativity to the acting human being: is he a man of great merit or is he not?
Now this relativity to the human being does not mean that moral knowledge—that is to
say, the choice of the right thing in the circumstances—is so-called personal or
incommunicable knowledge, although in a sense it is so. Aristotle refers in a passage
which we have read to sense perception, which we may understand to mean here
something like taste and feeling in modern times, taste and feeling in contradistinction to
rational discourse. But this is not Aristotle’s last word on it. What Aristotle has in mind is
this: every sensible man, every phronimos, including Mr. A, would agree that a man
circumstanced like Mr. A, here and now, would have to act in this or this manner. Maybe
no other man now living would ever have to act in this manner, but that a man
circumstanced in this way has to act in this manner, all sensible men would equally
admit. There is no relativism here. Now one could find a difficulty in the following fact.
Aristotle mentions as an example of a sensible man in the sixth book Pericles. This does
not mean that he was an admirer of Pericles, but he took up a popular example in order to
make clear1 [the distinction between Pericles] and his philosophic teacher, Anaxagoras,
who was not sensible but wise, meaning theoretically wise. Now in Thucydides’s
History, Pericles’s sensibleness is presented very powerfully, especially in the statement
about the war policy: Athens is going to win the war if she does not engage in
expansionism during the war, tries to keep her fleet, her navy in being, and preserves her
territory to the extent to which it is fortified by the Great Wall. And this was neglected
after Pericles’s death, [and] in the end, Athens’ defeat. But then there comes up another
man called Alcibiades, a kinsman of Pericles but of very different character, and
Alcibiades demands the expedition to Sicily, the conquest of Sicily. And this fails, but
not because it was intrinsically impossible, according to what Thucydides says. It would
have been possible but for certain follies of the Athenian dēmos, who drove out
Alcibiades; and therefore Nicias, who was not cut out for such a thing, was in command
in Sicily.
So here we have two sensible men, one saying, “No expansion during the war,” and the
other saying, “Expansion during the war, if properly done, is perfectly feasible.” What
would Aristotle say to this point? I’m sure we could find other examples, perhaps even
from contemporary life. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

220

Student: Was Alcibiades a sensible man?
LS: . . . But his policy was sensible, according to Thucydides’s presentation.
Same Student: I don’t think that Thucydides presents him as a sensible man.
LS: But the policy was.
Same Student: The policy could have been sensible in a certain sense, but something
which succeeds by an inch is not particularly sensible.
LS: Thucydides goes beyond that. But you are quite right with your questions. Aristotle
doesn’t discuss this case, of course, but he lays down the principles. And behind
Alcibiades’s notion there is the prospect of further conquest, conquest even of the whole
of Sicily, not only of Syracuse: of Carthage and so on. So indefinite expansion; and if you
state it in clear theoretical terms, a universal expansion. But this policy as such is
explicitly condemned by Aristotle in the seventh book of the Politics. So we would have
to come back to say that, as you rightly said, by considering Alcibiades’s other acts, that
he is not a model of a sensible man; whereas in the case of Pericles, it makes some sense
to say that he is. That’s very true.
Now the last point I would like to mention is this. Aristotle has no doubt that a perfectly
sensible man—“sensible” is the convenient English translation for the Greek word
phronimos and for the Latin prudentia. So Aristotle has no doubt that the perfectly
sensible, i.e., virtuous man is possible, which means a man who never sins and never has
cause to repent. This question came up the last time. Here we see very clearly the
fundamental difference between Aristotle and the Bible, and it would be unintelligent, not
to use moral expressions, not to see this difference. A very frequent way of speaking
about this matter today is: well, Aristotle was a Greek and the Bible is non-Greek. In
other words, there is a difference of two cultures. Now this will not do under any
circumstances, because the claims raised by each, by Aristotle or Greek philosophy in
general and by the Bible, are “quote absolute.” Aristotle does not say, “This is good for
Greeks”: he seeks the human good, human virtue. And similar things apply to the Bible.
Now these claims must be faced. If they are not faced, we have already decided against
both whether we admit it or are aware of it or not, and we have decided against them in
favor of a third alternative. Most commonly, the third alternative is what we may call
pluralism, namely, all cultures are of equal respectability. And you can’t blame Aristotle
for being a Greek nor Josiah for being a Jew; they couldn’t help that. But on the other
hand, you cannot expect that what they demanded is in any way important for us living
today. There are of course not only these two, but n cultures. Now one can call this view
pluralism, but one must see, and that is decisive, that pluralism is a monism of sorts,
namely, pluralism in this sense means what is good. Whether Aristotle’s doctrine is right,
or the biblical doctrine, or the doctrine of the Sanskrits and so on, that is wholly
irrelevant. We know what is good: what is good is to be of universal tolerance and to
enjoy viewing the manyness of human possibilities or cultures. Then this third alternative

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

221

has taken the place, say, of Aristotle’s Ethics. That is the minimum one would have to
demand. But without some moral principle, without some value system, as they call it
today, it is impossible to say anything about matters of human importance. You wanted to
say something? Please.
Student: No.
LS: No. I see. Well, I’m so unfortunate as always to have the impression that you want to
say something. Perhaps this is an indirect way of encouraging you. Good. Yes, Mr.
Wedergreen?
Student: . . . You say that we have to face the issue, but as soon we face the issue
between Aristotle’s Ethics and the Bible, haven’t we also already decided, by our
willingness to face that issue or by the way in which we resolve it?
LS: You mean decided in what way?
Same Student: For one or the other.
LS: No, what at least we are trying to do here is to understand this particular alternative
represented by Greek philosophy, and more specifically in the form this was given by
Aristotle. And we look at it and see what recommends it and perhaps also what speaks
against it, and that this interpretation cannot be done without some enthusiasm and
therefore creating the impression of a hundred percent identification, that is a minor flaw
for which I ask your forgiveness. But I would say: does it not make sense that before you
make a decision, you will listen to the teacher in question and hear what he has to say?
The situation with which we are confronted today is this: that especially in the social
sciences, with which we are here concerned, there is something like the denial of
philosophy altogether, popularly known as positivism, and this is indeed untenable. That
I think one can be shown. And also, this alternative which I called now pluralism is also a
very popular view today and [is] of course underlying in fact positivism but is not openly
avowed, even this, I believe, is an untenable view. And therefore I think the alternatives
on the level of Aristotle and the Bible are of a quite higher dignity and a quite higher
importance.
Mr. Shulsky: . . . there is the further problem that, going about the study of Aristotle in a
serious way and using, you know, trying to see what the evidence is that Aristotle
presumes and so forth—in a way it implies, even if it isn’t explicit, a dependence on the
types of methods of reason and of observation which uses the natural faculties and so
forth. It would seem to be an issue, at least with respect to the Bible, and so in that sense,
I think maybe that’s what Mr. Wedergren meant, that we’re sort of deciding the issue by
going about it in terms of our own, the sort of natural faculties, Aristotle—
LS: I do not quite understand. Are you referring to the fact that the biblical teachings are
meant to be believed rather than . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

222

Mr. Shulsky: Well, that they’re meant to have a support that wouldn’t come up in a
discussion of Aristotle, I mean, according to the . . .
LS: Yes, but on the other hand, are you not compelled when you are confronted—say, for
example, the term “humility” is used in Aristotle only in a negative sense? And the same
is true of its use by Plato and Xenophon, at least in most places, whereas in the Bible it is
a term of high praise. But would it not be incumbent on the interpreter of the Bible to
make clear that this is not a degrading view to say that humility (in Greek, tapeinotēs,
“lowliness”) is not simply low but something very high? Is it not incumbent on the
theologian to show that we, and not only we but Aristotle and Plato themselves, have
some grounds for being humble? Therefore must there not be—is it possible for a
theological teaching to be presented without recourse to argument, without reference to
what we can know by our unassisted reason?
Mr. Shulsky: Well, it would just seem that there’s—I mean, part of the problem is that
the only way you could prove, I think, the way in which a theologian would attempt to
prove, that there’s something good about humility, that it is not the low thing that it might
strike one to be immediately, is on the basis of the type of theoretical considerations that
Aristotle would consider to be somewhat out of the way with respect to a practical
science.
LS: Well, the Aristotelian self-denying ordinance is not necessarily binding on the
interpreter if the exclusion of theoretical knowledge would lead to a distortion of the
moral facts. If this would prove to be the case, then one has to . . . Aristotle and has to
say: We have a very high regard for you, Aristotle, but here you are wrong.
Mr. Shulsky: Well, wouldn’t that—
LS: But I don’t believe that that is necessary. If you think only of the case of humility:
you do not have to become a physicist or a mathematician to argue that out, you simply
have to discuss the question: is it possible for man to be so impeccable and so selfsatisfied as Aristotle seems to assume? Think only of the reasons for humility which are
supplied by theoretical knowledge itself. After all, however final Aristotle might have
thought his account of the whole to be, even in his lifetime, but surely later on, it has
become very questionable. Who dares to say today that the heavenly bodies are living
beings—you know, sun, moon, and the stars—merely because when we look up to them
we see that they move and we don’t see anything pushing them, so they must have the
principle of motion in themselves; but a being which has the principle of motion in itself
is a living being, hence the stars are living beings? Genesis, the first chapter, knew
already that the stars are not gods, are not living beings. So the author of the Genesis, if
we take the now-prevailing view that it was not God but some human being, divined here
a truth which Aristotle did not divine. So in other words, [a case for] humility can be
made against Aristotle, and the same would apply to other things. For example, the
chapter on magnanimity in the fourth book, which is the antibiblical statement in a way in
the whole Ethics, because here pride—a noble pride, but pride nevertheless—is presented
as the crown of all virtue. This would have to be considered. Indeed, if the term “faith,”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

223

in contradistinction to understanding, has any meaning, it means that the acceptance of
the biblical teaching can never be possible on rational grounds alone. But this doesn’t
mean that rational grounds may not be sufficient to show the limitations of, say, Aristotle.
Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: I didn’t quite follow you. It seems to me that there are so many things that go
against what you’ve been saying. I’m thinking, for instance, of Thomas simply as a fine
commentator who says that the highest science is not based on reason but is based on
some other science.
LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: Consequently, if one—if it was important to you, not just as a theoretical
issue, but important to you to know those kinds of things, then one simply couldn’t—I
mean, how can you decide? You can’t say: Well, I’ll decide on the basis of reason,
because the principles of the highest reason . . . accessible . . .
LS: But what is the principle of Thomas’s criticism of Aristotle, I mean, [on] all points
where he deviates from him? That Aristotle did not prove his point. That Aristotle did not
prove his point. And Aristotle claims to have proved his point. The biblical theologian
does not claim to have proved his point, and therefore what Thomas shows is merely that
it is not demonstrably false, that it is not demonstrably nonsense, the
unbelievable . . . And so what Thomas proves is that it is possible to hold the biblical
beliefs. He cannot make the biblical beliefs rational and therefore compelling. That’s
impossible, because that contradicts their nature as beliefs.
Be this as it may, I hope you will agree with me on a very small but not negligible point
that I tried to make: that it is necessary to understand the relation of, say, biblical morality
and Aristotelian or philosophic morality. And there are surely striking differences
between the two. Humility I mentioned, but I could as well have said mercy. Mercy has
some very . . . Yes?
Student: Aristotle gives, say, many examples of philosophers, but he gives two examples
of sensible men, maybe only one. I don’t know . . But Plato doesn’t give any, I don’t
think.
LS: Oh, Plato gives some. Let me see. They are there in Plato. But the point is this: in
Plato we have this phenomenon of which I spoke before regarding Aristotle. In Plato the
sun, of which I spoke, is always there; and therefore the things which are peculiarly
visible and attractive in moonlight are not so attractive in the pages of Plato, meaning
because Socrates is always present in one way or the other. But now let me see. Who is
presented as a particularly sensible man in Plato? That is a good question. Help me a bit.
Student: Gorgias.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

224

LS: Gorgias is not sensible. Gorgias is a man who is unable to continue to talk because
he has talked so much already. That’s the way in which he is introduced. No, that won’t
do. And Protagoras is presented as a man who makes one blunder after another. Socrates
confronts him three times in a row with choices, and he invariably picks the wrong one.
And he is a teacher of prudence! That is—no, honestly, you find nice men, I mean at first
glance, at least, like Cephalus. But you have no—you would say he’s a sensible man?
Student: He obeyed the law. [Laughter]
LS: But if the law is terrible—
Same Student: The laws were not terrible. The laws of Athens were reasonable laws.
LS: These laws brought Socrates to the hemlock.
Same Student: Yes, but Socrates thought them so reasonable that he drank it.
LS: Yes, well, because the alternatives were worse than to obey the Athenian laws.
Same Student: So if Socrates was justified in obeying the laws, so was Cephalus.
LS: All right. Yes, but surely not for the same reasons. But let us—I’m willing to grant
you that Cephalus is a reasonable man. All right.
Another Student: . . . How about Theaetetus, who in the conversation between Euclides
and Terpsion at the beginning of the Theaetetus is presented as a manly person but as . . .
LS: Theaetetus. Yes, he is a young, very pleasant mathematician, and very able as a
mathematician.
Same Student: The conversation between Euclides and Terpsion theoretically takes
place much later than the conversation—
LS: Yes.
Same Student: and Theaetetus has distinguished himself in battle—
LS: Yes.
Same Student: and been well spoken of.
LS: And was a good citizen. Yes, you could say that. So there are—let us then grant that
there are some examples. But we had some difficulties, because there are so many more
who are not sensible men, either because they are too young or because there is
something more deeply wrong. For example, in the Charmides, Charmides and Critias—
well, they later on became tyrants. So their sensibleness cannot have been too strong.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

225

There must have been a little worm gnawing at it. So that is—yes, that is an interesting
question, an interesting approach to Plato. Yes?
Another Student: I was thinking that I would like to go further and ask, well, if—I mean
the way that Socrates speaks of Pericles in the Gorgias, for example, and compare it with
Aristotle’s statement in book 6 that Pericles was a sensible man. Well, that’s a striking
difference, but when you think about it, is there any ground for saying that there is more
likely, from Aristotle’s point of view, more likely to be more sensible men in the true
sense of the term than there are to be—in other words, who would in his view—what
sensible man and what philosopher?
LS: From which point of view?
Same Student: From Aristotle’s point of view.
LS: Surely much more sensible. After all, the people who manage their households, and
short of great economic crises they [not only] survive2 but put something by for a rainy
day, that is one sign of sensibleness. They are quite common. Quite common.
Same Student: Sensible on the level of Pericles.
LS: Oh, on this higher level, even there, I believe there are. Well, let us make a
qualification: there may be situations in which it is so difficult to act sensibly that it is
practically impossible, that people have to ultimately flip a coin, which is a kind of
declaration of bankruptcy for sensibleness.
Student: I believe last week you referred to Socrates as being the most sensible man.
LS: That is true, because here sensibilility is understood in the Socratic sense of the
word, and according to Socrates virtue is knowledge or phronēsis, prudence. But this is
not the common understanding.
Same Student: Would it be Aristotle’s understanding?
LS: No, of course not. He rejects that. For Aristotle, the question of what is virtue is
beyond the interest and the ken of the perfect gentleman. For Socrates, the perfect
gentleman is precisely the man who devotes most of his waking time to thinking about
what is virtue. Surely that is very different.
Same Student: That would coincide with Plato’s reflection on Theaetetus, namely, that
he washed out as a theoretical man, and that he didn’t fulfill the promise that he displayed
in youth, in answer to Mr. . . .
LS: Do you accept that?
Another Student: . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

226

LS: Well, one can of course say that Euclides and Terpsion are not Plato. And one would
have to see how to translate that as to express the view of Plato himself.
Student: I think it shows not that . . . Theaetetus [is] theoretically contemptible, it shows
naturally the tension between, or the possibility that one could be a perfectly good and
sensible man without being . . .
LS: Yes, this is another matter. But if we speak of a decent man, a gentleman in the
ordinary colloquial sense, there are of course quite a few, and therefore also in Plato’s
dialogues. Laches and Nicias are of course nice gentlemen, although not very successful
as generals. [Laughter] Let me say not always successful, because Nicias was successful
for quite some time, but then only when he was confronted with an insoluble difficulty in
Sicily, then he failed. And Laches also failed in Sicily, that is true. But, you see, what
Plato also does, if one reads him carefully, is to supply us with a kind of excellence. For
example, Cephalus is the perfect grandfather, I would say. Everyone would wish to have
such a nice grandfather, at first reading. And yet, if you look more closely, you see there
are some indelicacies which he commits and which lead to a changed view of his being.
When he is asked what use he makes of his money—you remember?—and then he says:
Well, of course I pay my debts to gods and men, because any day I may die, and I want to
have a good conscience.
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, that is a very respectable motive, as far as it goes. But then the question arises:
What did he use his money for when he was young? And that you have to figure out for
yourself. [Laughter] And then it is no longer so simple, the phenomenon of Cephalus, and
similar considerations apply to all of them. Good. Now let us turn then to book 3, if Mr.
Pangle will begin.
Reader:
Virtue however is concerned with passionsi and actions, and it is only voluntary actions
for which praise and blame are given; those that are involuntary are condoned, and
sometimes even pitied. Hence it seems to be necessary for the student of ethics to define
the difference between the Voluntary and the Involuntary; and this will also be of service
to the legislator in assigning rewards and punishments. (1109b30-35)
LS: Let us stop here. “In assigning honors and punishments.” Now of course he doesn’t
speak of “students of ethics”; he says “those who consider, make considerations
regarding virtue,” which is less technical. Now why does he suddenly take up this
question of the voluntary and the unvoluntary? Now it will appear later that there is a
connection with the problem of the voluntary and that of election or choice. And we have
heard before that virtue is a habit of choosing, so Aristotle continues his analysis of virtue
here. Virtue is a habit of choosing, therefore we have to know what is choice. And for
some reasons not yet made clear, in order to understand choice we have to understand
i

In Rackham’s translation: “emotions.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

227

voluntariness. There is one little difficulty: “voluntariness” reminds us of course of
“voluntas,” of the will. There is no Greek word for “will,” and that is very strange. The
word “will” comes from Latin, voluntas. There is no Greek word. The Greek word means
rather “wish” than “will,” as we will see very soon. Generally speaking, we can say right
now that election is a species of the voluntary. Perhaps we should simply drop the word
“voluntary” and speak of “spontaneous,” in order to avoid any misleading suggestions.
Now virtuous actions are praiseworthy and vicious actions are blameworthy. And
therefore they are spontaneous. Nonspontaneous actions are not praiseworthy and
blameworthy, with certain qualifications which Aristotle will speak of in the sequel.
Now this subject is necessary, first for those who make investigations about virtue, and
secondly for the legislators. “Those who make investigations” (I’m speaking of
observations regarding virtue): this may very well refer to people like the students of
Aristotle. Involuntary actions deserve excuse and sometimes even pity. Aristotle does not
elaborate on this because he assumes that everyone knows that. If you are forced to do it,
literally forced—someone forces your finger to move a trigger by which to kill someone
very dear to you—then we of course don’t say [that] this man is a murderer of his nearest
and dearest, but we have compassion with him. In other cases, we don’t go so far as to
have compassion, but we would at least excuse his action. We do not regard it as murder.
The details will be explained in the sequel. Yes?
Reader:
It is then generally held that actions are involuntary when done under compulsion or
through ignorance; and that an act is compulsory when its origin is from without, being of
such a nature that the agent, who is really passive, contributes nothing to it: for example,
when he is carried somewhere by stress of weather, or by people who have him in their
power. (1109b35-1110a4)
LS: Yes. Now the unspontaneous actions are due either to violence or to ignorance, and
Aristotle speaks first about unspontaneous actions due to violence. Yes. And the cases are
quite clear: if someone is compelled, literally, by a storm, by a hurricane, to land in the
midst of the house of somebody else and by his sudden falling down kills someone, he is
clearly not responsible for the death of that man. And the same is true if human beings
force him. Yes?
Reader:
But there is some doubt about actions done through fear of a worse alternative, or
for some noble object—as for example if a tyrant having a man’s parents and
children in his power commands him to do something base, when if he complies
their lives will be spared but if he refuses they will be put to death. It is open to
question whether such actions are spontaneous or unspontaneous.ii A somewhat
similar case is when cargo is jettisoned in a storm; apart from circumstances, no
one voluntarily throws away his property, but to save his own life and that of his
shipmates any sane man would do so. Acts of this kind then are ‘mixed,’iii but
ii
iii

In Rackham’s translation: “voluntary or involuntary.”
In Rackham’s translation: “‘mixed’ or composite.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

228

they approximate rather to the spontaneous iv class. For at the actual time when
they are done they are chosen or willed; and the endv of an act varies with the
occasion, so that the terms ‘spontaneous’ and ‘unspontaneous’vi should be used
with reference to the time of action; now the actual deed is done spontaneously, vii
for the origin of the movement of the parts of the body instrumental to the act lies
in the agent; and when the origin of an action is in oneself, it is in one’s own
power to do it or not to do it.viii Such acts therefore are spontaneous, though
perhaps unspontaneous ix apart from circumstances—for no one would choose to
do any such thing in and for itself. (1110a4-19)
LS: What he says (“apart from circumstances,” you said?) is in Greek “simply.” You can
even say “absolutely,” but what is absolutely true is not true. It is true only by virtue of an
abstraction, which for certain purposes is useful, but the truth resides in the full action,
i.e., including the circumstances. I believe the examples are clear. In all these cases—I
mean, the case of the tyrant with the children has acquired a new actuality in our century;
for some centuries these cases were regarded as belonging to a remote past, but today
these happen almost every day.
Now this gives rise to all kinds of questions. These are mixed actions, Aristotle says, yet
they are voluntary. In other words, if the man, out of fear for his wife and children,
betrays the most important secrets to an enemy, it is his responsibility. There are
attenuating circumstances; that’s another matter. But he commits high treason, that is
what Aristotle seems to say. But still, this case is a mixed one. If it were merely saving
his own life, there would be no question: he has to sacrifice his life. But if his nearest and
dearest, especially people who cannot defend themselves, are involved, the case becomes
mixed. Yes?
Student: I don’t understand particularly when he says it is mixed, yes, but it falls into the
sphere of voluntary action, particularly as the origins of the action are at the end in itself.
Now it seems to me in two ways here that he sort of violates his own dictum set up earlier
about—you might say about judging under the circumstances. Now for example, there’s a
great deal of difference if somebody from his own family is taken hostage and a close
friend. Now by the token that a member of your family is of your own blood, I don’t see
how he can say that really the origin of the thing is linked up personally in him and is
actually a part of him—
LS: Because he has a choice. He has a choice: he can or cannot reveal that secret.
Same Student: Well, but if the tyrant had me and he says, “Look you do this, or I’ll
shoot you,” I have a choice.
iv

In Rackham’s translation: “voluntary.”
In Rackham’s translation: “end or motive.”
vi
In Rackham’s translation: “‘voluntary’ and ‘involuntary’.”
vii
In Rackham’s translation: “voluntarily.”
viii
In Rackham’s translation: “in one’s own power to do it or not.”
ix
In Rackham’s translation: “voluntary, though perhaps involuntary.”
v

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

229

LS: All right, but the mere fact that you can deliberate, if only for a minute, shows that,
whereas in the case—if the tyrant’s bodyguard or ten fellows compel you to pull the
trigger in order thus to kill another enemy of his tyrannical regime, then you have no
choice. You don’t do it: your finger does it, in a way, but your finger as the instrument of
the bodyguard. But in the case, in this case you decide. You may say that the decision
goes without saying, but that’s not quite true, because then you could also take the view
of Hobbes and say [that] if you betray your country in order to save dear life, then you do
not commit a crime because the greatest good which you have is your life—or at least the
first good which you have is your life and on which all other goods depend, and therefore
a man is even closer to himself than his nearest and dearest. And they can easily make an
argument for that.
Student: Yes, but they can also make the argument, as many people have, that a person’s
family is really nothing more than an extension of one’s self. It can come down to that, as
opposed to making an argument, say, for example, that yes, I have a close friend but not
to the extent that he’s part of myself, really, the way my—
LS: All right, but if you are not entitled to betray your country in order to save your life,
you are also not entitled to betray your country in order to save your nearest and dearest.
That is Aristotle’s position, it seems. He admits that there is a certain terrible pressure,
but a pressure which does not do away with spontaneity, or responsibility, as we would
say. Yes. Now let us go on.
Reader:
Sometimes indeed men are actually praised for deeds of this ‘mixed’ class, namely when
they submit to some disgrace or pain as the price of some great and noble object; though
if they do so without any such motive they are blamed, since it is contemptible to submit
to a great disgrace with no advantage or only a trifling one in view.
LS: Now what does he have in mind here? For some mixed actions, properly done, men
are even praised. For example, Socrates is compelled to be disgraced and to die, and yet
he is praised for it. He didn’t choose this wholly of his own, but he was confronted with
this choice between the right and the wrong. He chose the disgraceful thing, because it is
disgraceful to be executed. Good. These actions are voluntary. Socrates’s action was
voluntary, although he did not wish to be confronted with that choice. But once he was
confronted with it, he was confronted with a choice. As he says, he could have run away
before legal proceedings had come under way, and perhaps his accusers would have been
very happy to get rid of him this way without the complications of a trial. Yes?
Reader:
In some cases again, such submission though not praised is condoned, when a man does
something wrong through fear of penalties that impose too great a strain on human
nature, and that no one could endure. Yet there seem to be some acts which a man cannot
be compelled to do, and rather than do them he ought to submit to the most terrible death.
(111019-27)

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

230

LS: Now let us stop here for one moment. Now literally translated, he says: “There are
perhaps some things to which one cannot be compelled, or [to] which one ought not to be
compelled, but one should rather die under the most terrible tortures than do them. For
some mixed actions, there is not indeed praise, but forgiveness.” According to Thomas’s
commentary, someone is threatened with being set on fire if he does not tell a jocular lie
or if he does not commit acts that do not become his dignity. Now these are of course
relatively harmless cases. Who would not tell a jocular lie—say, “I am six feet high”
when I am not six feet high—under compulsion? Or who would not do something which
ordinarily only a garbage collector would do, which doesn’t befit his dignity, under
terrible pressure by the tyrant? Which sensible man would not do it? No gentleman would
blame that gentleman who is taking care of his garbage under such circumstances. x Yes.
But the question is: would it not also apply to a man who reveals a very important state
secret to the enemy in order to prevent the torture-killing of his wife and children? We
have seen that before. Could not one say that is a pressure going beyond what human
nature can bear? I believe that would probably be decided differently in different ages. In
ages in which martyrdom was demanded more as a matter of course than it is today, he
would have probably decided differently than [he would] today. That one has to take into
consideration. Yes?
Reader:
For instance, we think it ridiculous that Alcmaeon in Euripides’ play is compelled by
certain threats to murder his own mother!xi (1110a27-29)
LS: Now how was he compelled? Well, his play has not been preserved. We simply
know this: that he was compelled by his father’s curses to kill his mother. In other words,
his father cursed him: “If you don’t kill her, I will do3 terrible things [to you].” Is this the
kind of pressure like that exerted by the tyrant? Aristotle says here again, before what we
read, “perhaps.” This creates some difficulties, because Aristotle sometimes uses
“perhaps” as an elegant expression in order not to speak pedantically. Where he speaks of
things which are quite sure, he says sometimes “perhaps,” as we would say in an
argument in order not to appear to be too crude, or to come down with a ton of bricks,
you might say, “This is perhaps not so,” as you say. But sometimes it is also meant more
seriously, namely, it is an open question for him. Yes?
Reader:
But it is sometimes difficult to decide how far we ought to go in choosing to do a given
act rather than suffer a given penalty, or in enduring a given penalty rather than commit a
given action; and it is still more difficult to abide by our decision when made, since in
most of such dilemmas the penalty threatened is painful and the deed forced upon us
dishonourable, which is why praise and blame are bestowed according as we do or do not
yield to such compulsion.
x
xi

Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §394.
In Rackham’s translation: “his mother.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

231

What kind of actions then are to be called ‘compulsory’? (1110a29-b1)
LS: Let us stop here. Now the great difficulty is of course to judge properly in borderline
cases, and [it is] still more difficult to act properly in borderline cases when you are
exposed to the pressure of the tyrant or whatever it may be. You want to say something?
Student: I want to ask you about an example which seems . . . such items that are not
involuntary . . . consider that actions . . . reason . . . voluntary seeking of
knowledge . . . would help the prospects of . . .
LS: Can you—I mean, the question of ignorance will be taken up later. He speaks here
only of violence. But since you brought it up, give me an example, so that I can see what
you are driving at.
Same Student: . . . when, in his willingness to, for the sake of knowledge to pursue it,
even when that pursuit holds the prospect of revealing . . .
LS: What kind of knowledge would he like to gain by that? Of how a human being dies?
Then he should study medicine, and he will go to anatomical courses and pathological
courses and see plenty of it. I do not see what you mean. You do not think of the case of
Raskolnikov.xii
Same Student: No, I’m thinking of Oedipus.
LS: Oedipus’s case is entirely different. He didn’t know.
Same Student: But the question was that his action . . . involuntary. He didn’t know.
LS: Sure, Oedipus would be acquitted by any civilized law court.
Same Student: Then the question becomes: what about the voluntary action to know the
circumstances, when that knowledge seems to hold the promise of suffering
and . . . would Aristotle say that that’s . . .
LS: I still do not understand the case to which you refer. I mean, that Oedipus will be
miserable despite the fact that a sensible law court would not condemn him, that is
unfortunate. Therefore he is an object of compassion, as Aristotle said.
Student: . . . sends a messenger to find out about . . .
LS: I mean, if you take the situation as it is in Sophocles’s Oedipus, he is given very
good advice by an authoritative man, by Teiresias, who tells him, “Don’t go into that.”
And if he is so obstinate, then he is severely punished for that. In difficult cases one
should obey a wiser man than oneself.
xii

Protagonist of Fyodor Dostoevsky’s novel Crime and Punishment (1866).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

232

Student: Yes, but . . . but it’s also in one way helpful . . . and two . . .
LS: But how do you know that Teirisias would not have taken off the curse without
Oedipus entering? We read this all too much from our modern point of view instead of
following simple principles of common sense, commonsensical prudence. If you mean
something much deeper than these things we have discussed hitherto, whether the myth
does not also mean—this is never stated, at least in the part of the Oedipus story told us
by Sophocles—that this is Oedipus’s punishment for having found out the truth, solved
the riddle of the Sphinx, so in other words, every theoretical man has in a manner killed
his father and mated with his mother, then that is no longer a fit subject for discussion.
[Laughter] But it is surely something to which Aristotle has given quite a bit of thought.
Mr. Fielding?
Student: I wondered what Aristotle would say, or perhaps does say implicitly about the
case of Alcibiades.
LS: He doesn’t say anything. I looked [it] up yesterday, because I wasn’t sure. In the
Athenian Constitution he is not mentioned.
Same Student: But that would be a case in which a man is forced in some sense to
decide—
LS: No, no, he’s not forced. That is a modern view. Whether he wanted to—he was
confronted with a choice between returning to Athens and [submitting] to judicial
procedure there, which probably would have led to capital punishment, not certainly; and
the alternative being to run away to the enemy—no, to run away to another country. That
he chose Sparta and betrayed all the secrets of Athens to Sparta, that was not necessary.
He could have gone to some out of the way place in Sicily and waited until the storm had
blown over. But Alcibiades was driven by an infinite ambition, and that is no excuse.
Then you can justify all the most horrible crimes ever committed.
Student: Would Aristotle say that he should have gone back to Athens? That’s what I’m
primarily interested in.
LS: That I do not know, because I don’t know the circumstances in which Aristotle
himself left Athens. [Laughter] I mean, he left Athens in a hurry, this much we know, and
the reason which he gave is that Athens should not again commit a sin against
philosophy.xiii Now whether he was already accused or whether he expected an
accusation is a different story. There is nothing wrong to leave a city if you expect to get
into trouble there.
Same Student: That’s a rather fine line.
LS: Yes, well, casuistry has always to do with fine lines. Otherwise, it is not interesting.
Because if you raise the question whether I should pay income tax in 1967, that’s not a
xiii

Cf. Aelian, Varia historia, book 3, chapter 36.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

233

case requiring discussion, but there are other cases which deserve discussion. This young
man—you wanted to say something.
Student: I was going to ask about Aristotle’s leaving Athens.
LS: Yes, I do not know enough about it. I know only the story, that he left—“quote, he
had to leave,” which is an ambiguous expression—that he left, and that he was apparently
threatened. Whether he was threatened with death, or with exile, or a fine or what, that I
do not know. I don’t whether it is known, but surely I do not know it at this moment. No?
Yes, in 1110b.
Reader:
What kind of actions then are to be called—xiv (1110b1)
LS: In other words, there are no certain rules which you can give here, but the decision
must be left to the judgment of of the wise man . . . who might happen to be an historian.
That was formerly thought to be a function of the historian. He would supply that
judgment on the actions which was perhaps not made at the time or had not come down
from the time. So this is not fundamentally different from what we do in present cases,
because hindsight is unfair in both cases. That is crucial. Something which could not have
been known at the time, that is hindsight [. . .] There are difficult questions, like those of
the Second World War: what was the greater danger in the long run, Hitler or Stalin? And
the conversation in a way has gone up to the present day.4 Churchill, who had something
to do with the decision, said, “You can make only one link in the chain of destiny.” At
this moment in 1941 and 1942, the greater danger was Hitler. There was still some hope,
however dim, that Stalin might . . . and this proved to be an error.
Reader:
To apply the term ‘compulsory’ to acts done for the sake of pleasure or for noble
objects, on the plea that these exercise constraint on us from without, is to make
every action compulsory. For pleasure and nobility between them supply the
motive of all actions whatsoever. Also to act under compulsion and unwillingly is
painful, but actions done for their pleasantness or nobility are done with pleasure.
And it is absurd to blame external things, instead of ourselves for falling an easy
prey to their attractions; or to take the credit of our noble deeds to ourselves,
while putting the blame for our disgraceful ones upon the temptations of pleasure.
It appears indeed that an act is compulsory when its origin is from outside, the
person compelled contributing nothing to it. (1110b9-17)
LS: This is the conclusion of the first part of the discussion on spontaneous and
nonspontaneous [actions]. And the point which he makes is that in the case of the
nonspontaneous [action] due to compulsion or violence, the cause is outside of us. The
simple case . . . pulling the trigger.
xiv

There is no audiofile for the remainder of this session. The remainder of the transcript of this
session is taken from the original transcript. Ellipses in the original transcript have been
preserved. When the transcriber noted “inaudible,” we have put ellipses in square brackets.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

234

Student: [. . .]
LS: Aristotle seems to be rather tough in his judgment, and Thomas Aquinas even a bit
more, if one can make that distinction. I think we would say, whether this is due to our
greater humanity or to a greater softness on our part it’s a rather difficult question, but we
would be inclined today toward the other side. Something done under torture beyond
human endurance [. . .] We would hesitate to pronounce easy judgment if we had not
been ourselves in that situation, although that is not perhaps a sufficient reason for
judging other men particularly tough and therefore regard as titillation what others regard
as torture [. . .]
Student: [. . .]
LS: Now let me see. I am not sure whether I understood you. The point which he makes
first is that violence is outside of us. And someone could say: but the pleasant and the
noble are also outside of us. Take a simple case: the apple which attracts, or the wreath
given to a victor in the game. And Aristotle says, of course, if these are understood to be
outside things, and therefore their influence is toward violence, then all human actions
would be violent and we would not have any responsibility for anything we are doing.
But people would then contradict themselves, because they would say, if they are noble
deeds:5 “I did it.” But if they are disgraceful deeds, then they would say: “It’s not my
fault; it was that outside influence.” Aristotle says that noble things are done with
pleasure—I’m sorry, that pleasant things are done with pleasure. This is done with
pleasure and therefore spontaneously, whereas it is not [a] sufficient but a necessary
criterion for the violent that it is done with pain.
Student: [. . .]
LS: But the point is: does this take away from the voluntarism of the action?
Student: [. . .]
LS: There is surely a most important difference between Aristotle and Kant, but to what
extent does it come up here? Kant would of course say that if someone causes you to pull
your finger to pull the trigger, that’s not your action. There would be no difference
between Aristotle and Kant in this respect. You cannot say that the pleasant and noble
things are outside and exert a pressure on you, and therefore you have no responsibility
for giving in or not giving in. The difference between Aristotle and Kant does not come
in in this elementary consideration.
Student: [. . .]
LS: But Aristotle does not assume that the moral things, to use a Kantian term, are done
for the sake of pleasure. They are done for the sake of the intrinsic morality. But the
question is: why ought we to do the noble things for their own sake? There is the

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

235

difference. Aristotle does not refer to moral law, but to what Aristotle refers is one of the
most difficult questions in ethics. The intrinsic nobility is in most cases there, but Kant
analyzes this intrinsic nobility in terms of a moral law which is not deducible or derivable
from anything we know at all. Aristotle does not do such [a thing].
Student: [. . .]
LS: Since all men do everything they do for the sake of happiness, that is no explanation.
The difference is that the noble man does the noble things with a view to his happiness,
and the ignoble does the ignoble things with a view to his happiness. They have different
understandings of happiness.
Student: [. . .]
LS: That is not Aristotle’s view of the situation. For Aristotle this intrinsic nobility of the
action is the core of happiness, and therefore happiness does not appear as an
independent notion. Now generally speaking (and I think I have said this before), the
fundamental difference methodically between Kant and Aristotle is this. Now let us see
here the man, and here is the thing at which he aims, say, the action. The good action, the
noble or just action, must have no motive other than the intrinsic goodness of the action,
and this is [. . .] by nobility of action. In this respect there is no difference between
Aristotle and Kant. One can say that a moral teaching which denies that doesn’t come up
to the minimum of a moral teaching. But that is my impression.
And now there is something else. Let us call this the actor’s view, and let us put here an
A as a symbol for actor. But then there is another point of view, namely, the point of
view of a man who looks at A and his actions from without, and let us call him the
spectator. Now he will take in quite a few things here, say, the prehistory of the action.
Now Aristotle, in contradistinction to Kant, has also this point of view and regards it
perhaps as the superior point of view. Kant is of course familiar with the fact that you can
look at an action and analyze it purely theoretically; for example, you find a certain
density of divorces or murder in certain districts in certain years (this well-known theme
of research), and then you try to find out the efficient and material causes of that, whether
that is misery or poverty or what. For Kant, this kind of investigation, however important
technically, is inferior in dignity to this, to the moral judgment, whereas for Aristotle it
seems that the theoretical understanding is ultimately of higher rank than the moral
understanding. That is an important difference. This is connected with the fact that in
Kant’s moral philosophy proper nature plays no role, while in Aristotle’s moral doctrine
nature does play a great role. In other words, for Kant morality must consist in a freedom
from nature. Freedom from nature. For Aristotle there is no such freedom from nature,
but precisely in acting well human nature comes into its own.
Student: [. . .]
LS: But as to the point with which [we] are today concerned, there is no difference
between Aristotle and Kant in this.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 13

236

Now I think we have now reached the part where he turns to ignorance. My wish is to
discuss next time ignorance, and then the next great subject, election or choice. Now I
think we should read here 1115a, which is the end of the general discussion of virtue and
then make a big jump to book 5, the book on justice. However wonderful the parts which
we omit are, we have to omit them. And I urge you especially to read, if not all [of] books
3 and 4, at least the book 4 section on magnanimity.
1

Deleted “Pericles in contradistinction from.”
Moved “not only.”
3
Deleted “you.”
4
Deleted “and where.”
5
Deleted “they would say.”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

237

Session 14: March 27, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —and there must be this presupposition: you cannot deduce
goodness from nature because you don’t know that nature is good, and even if you do,
goodness is something different from nature in itself. So there must be a different
principle. There is another remark of Kant which is important, and crucial, in this
connection, and that is that the moral doctrine must liberate man from being tied to the
apron strings of nature.i Now if man’s goodness consists in properly satisfying his natural
inclinations, then his ends are not freely posited by man but imposed on him, although
agreed to by him. Therefore Kant’s work is one of the great milestones in the way
towards man’s liberation. And all [that] we think today of a conquest of nature, or other
notions connected with that, with the rule of man, with man’s being radically free: all this
has very much to do with Kant, and [it was] prepared by others but Kant went beyond all
his predecessors in this respect.
Student: I was thinking . . . favorite passage in the appendix to the Critique of Judgment,
where he talks about Spinoza and about that radical antithesis set up between the nature
in the first part of the Critique of Pure Reason and nature as suggested in the antinomies
and in practical reason, and man’s interest in resolving that and finding hints in nature of
intelligence in the beautiful of nature and also in the purposive forms of nature, so that
underlying that nature might be an intelligence that agrees with what man finds
internal—
LS: With what man finds?
Same Student: What man finds internal, the purposive nature of theoretical and practical
reason, primarily practical.
LS: How far is this relevant to our question now?
Same Student: Well, underlying the nature that appears, which the understanding
prescribes laws to, might be an understanding that has its grounds in something like
intelligence. That’s very important for man’s morality. That passage about Spinoza—let
us suppose a man like Spinoza who reveres the moral law but who doesn’t believe in
teleology or of any sort of purpose in nature, and what does he see? He sees corruption
and immorality and his—
LS: So he must be miserable.
Same Student: Yes. He finds no agreement between the internal legislation—

i

This metaphor appears in the preface to the second edition of the Critique of Pure Reason
(1787), although it is used there to characterize theoretical reason rather than moral doctrine.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

238

LS: Yes, but that means only that some agreement has to be found between theoretical
and practical reason. And links are supplied by teleology as well as by aesthetics. But as
far teleology is concerned, which is more immediately relevant, this never takes on
theoretical dignity in Kant. Never. Kant is sure that there will never be a Newton of the
blade of grass, that there will never be in fact an explanation of living things in terms of
physics and chemistry.ii But on the other hand, in our biological work we have to think
only in terms of ultimately physical or chemical explanations. That’s Kant’s point. What
we know is on the one side the phenomenal world, the world of modern science, and on
the other hand the moral law. And everything else is—there is no knowledge beyond that.
There are divinations, as it were, but no knowledge beyond that. So I think the difference
between Kant and Aristotle is absolutely fundamental, and I’m sure it was not your
intention to deny that.
Now let us turn to the third book of the Ethics. We are discussing the section on the
spontaneous and nonspontaneous. Well, what Aristotle means by this, you can easily see.
If you take out a dog on a leash, either he drags you or you drag him. When he drags you,
he is acting spontaneously and you are under some compulsion, but if you drag him, you
act spontaneously and the poor dog is under some compulsion. Is this clear? Now this is
the starting point of the analysis of what would later have been called the will. But this is
still subhuman in itself, although, as we will see, what Aristotle has to say about
spontaneity and nonspontaneity is colored by the specifically human. Obviously, if
spontaneity is rendered impossible not only by compulsion1, as we have seen last time,
but also by ignorance, then this latter kind of lack of spontaneity is a specifically human
lack of spontaneity. Ignorance would not affect the spontaneity of a brute animal.
Now Mr. Pangle is absent today, to my regret. Is there anyone here who is willing to take
his place? What about you Mr. Fairbanks? You have the same past, at least.
Student: Is that a prerequisite?
LS: Well, that would explain that you have the same present, to some extent. Now we
continue at 1110b18 to 24.
Reader:
Everything that is done by reason of ignorance is not voluntary; it is only what produces
pain and repentance that is involuntary or non-spontaneous. For the maniii who has done
something owing to ignorance, and feels not the least vexation at his action, has not acted
voluntarily, since he did not know what he was doing, nor yet involuntarily, since he is
not pained. Of people, then, who act by reason of ignorance he who repents is thought an
involuntary agent, and the man who does not repent may, since he is different, be called a
not voluntary agent; for, since he differs from the other, it is better that he should have a
name of his own.iv (1110b18-24)
ii

See Immanuel Kant, Critique of Judgment (1790), §75.
In Ross’s translation: “that is involuntary. For the man.”
iv
The student reads from Aristotle, The Nicomachean Ethics, trans. Sir David Ross (London:
Oxford University Press, 1954).
iii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

239

LS: Let us see. Think of Oedipus killing his father and mating with his mother: he did
this in ignorance. And the sign that he did it ignorantly is that he was pained after he
became aware of it and felt regret as soon as he came to know what he “quote did,
unquote,” because it was not truly his action. Is this reasonable? Good. Now?
Reader:
Acting by reason of ignorance seems also to be different from acting in ignorance; for the
man who is drunk or in a rage is thought to act as a result not of ignorance but of one of
the causes mentioned, yet not knowingly but in ignorance.
LS: Yes, this is a subtle distinction which is important, especially for penal law. I mean,
if Oedipus had done the terrible things he did while he was drunk, one could not say he
did it out of ignorance: we would say he did it because he was drunk. It’s a different
emphasis. The man who does something through being drunk or through being in anger
does not do it through ignorance. He does not know, as Aristotle puts it, yet he is “in
ignorance.” And I think the penal law, the law would treat differently a man who does
something from ignorance—for example, from thinking it is his car whereas it is the car
of somebody else; it looks very similar—and a man who does something because . . . he
is drunk. He is held responsible for his being drunk, but he cannot be held responsible for
inevitable, or practically inevitable ignorance. This will become clearer as we go. Go on.
Reader:
Now every wicked man is ignorant of what he ought to do and what he ought to abstain
from, and it is by reason of error of this kind that men become unjust and in general bad;
but the term ‘non-spontaneous’v tends to be used not if a man is ignorant of what is to his
advantage—for it is not mistaken purpose that causes unspontaneousvi action (it leads
rather to wickedness), nor ignorance of the universal (for that men are blamed)—but
ignorance of particulars, i.e. of the circumstances of the action and the objects with which
it is concerned. For it is on these that both pity and pardon depend, since the person who
is ignorant of any of these acts unspontaneously. (1110b24-1111a2)
LS: What Aristotle says here, in a way: all badness is through ignorance, as Socrates had
said before him without any qualification, meaning through ignorance of the things useful
to him or advantageous to him, and that is here a somewhat loose expression which
includes also the noble. At any rate, it means the universals involved. For example, if
someone commits a murder and says, “I did not know that murder is bad,” this is not an
excuse. But ignorance regarding particulars in the situation—for example, he did not
know that a man was standing there where he fired his pistol, or whatever it may be—this
kind of ignorance may be an excuse.
The ignorance which is unexcusable is that which is due to badness or identical with
badness: that one possibly does not know the most elementary distinctions between right
and wrong. Morality presupposes some knowledge, although the knowledge is not the
v
vi

In Ross’s translation: “involuntary.”
In Ross’s translation: “involuntary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

240

main point here, because knowing that murder is bad is [worth] very little if you murder
nevertheless. But this knowledge, which morality presupposes, must be available to all if
morality is to be expected from all, and therefore it is knowledge of universals, like
[knowing that] murder, and adultery, and so on are bad. The bad man does not know this.
He regards these actions as advantageous to him. That is the reason, I think, why
Aristotle uses here the term “advantageous.” He thinks, “That’s good for me.” He doesn’t
think that it is base; he doesn’t even know that, in the classic case. But Aristotle says
[that] the bad man does not know it through his [own] fault: he did not listen to what his
elders and betters told him. Or more practically and crudely stated, the knowledge of
these simple universals is supplied to all men by the law. In all countries, the law says
something to this effect. While it is true that the law may make distinctions between the
killing of a free man and the killing of a slave, that causes a complication which is not
negligible, but the main point is stated by [the] law everywhere. Now let us read the
sequel.
Reader:
Perhaps it is just as well, therefore, to determine their nature and number. A man may be
ignorant, then, of who he is, what he is doing, what or whom he is acting on, and
sometimes also what (e.g. what instrument) he is doing it with, and to what end (e.g. he
may think his act will conduce to someone’s safety), and how he is doing it (e.g. whether
gently or violently). Now of all these no one could be ignorant unless he were mad, and
evidently also he could not be ignorant of the agent; for how could he not know himself?
LS: So that is the least interesting case, that he has amnesia—a theme very important
now in popular culture, as you surely know. Yes?
Reader:
But of what he is doing a man might be ignorant, as for instance, people say ‘it slipped
out of their mouth as they were speaking’, or ‘they did not know it was a secret’, as
Aeschylus said of the mysteries.
LS: In other words, Aeschylus claimed not to know that it was forbidden to divulge the
Mysteries. And if he did not know, he was not guilty because this does not belong to the
things which all men are supposed to know. Only the initiated should know that, and he
was not initiated. Yes?
Reader:
Or a man might say ‘he let it go off when he merely wanted to show its working’, as the
man did with the catapult. (1111a3-11)
LS: Today we would take a revolver, [which], I think, is a very common case. Yes?
Reader:
Again, one might think one’s son was an enemy, as Merope did, or that a pointed spear
had a button on it, or that a stone was pumice-stone; or one might give a man a draught to
save him, and really kill him; or one might want to touch a man, as people do in sparring,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

241

and really wound him. The ignorance may relate, then, to any of these things, i.e. of the
circumstances of the action, and the man who was ignorant of any of these is thought to
have acted involuntarily, and especially if he was ignorant on the most important points;
and these are thought to be the circumstances of the action and its end. Further, the doing
of an act that is called involuntary in virtue of ignorance of this sort must be painful and
involve repentance. (1111a11-21)
LS: This he repeats again, because that is a kind of criterion [for determining] that a man
did it involuntarily: whether after having become aware of what he did, he says he’s sorry
for it. Now circumstances are here discussed, ignorance regarding the circumstances.
Circumstances are conditions of the human act. These conditions are either from the side
of the causes of the act or from the side of the act itself, which is the way in which
Thomas Aquinas explains that. vii Now from the side of the causes of the act: it could be
an efficient cause or the final cause. The efficient cause could be the principal cause or an
instrumental cause. For example, the error regarding the stone: that would be an error
regarding the instrumental cause. And as for the end, which means ignorance of the end
which follows from his actions as distinguished from the end intended by him. The
physician who gives a pill intending to save the patient, but in this particular case proves
to be fatal. And all his experience taught him that this pill was helpful. Now as regards
the circumstances of the part of act itself, there is first to consider the genus to which the
act belongs, that is to say, what the act is. For example, the case of Aeschylus: he thought
it was a harmless thing to mention these goings-on in the Mysteries, and it was not so. It
was something forbidden. And then the matter or the object of the act itself; for example,
that he thought the woman was his wife, and it was another woman; but he was justified
because the woman was found in [the] night time without light in his wife’s bed. This
case is also frequently discussed. And finally, the mode of the action, and that is whether
it is [done] with violence or soft[ly]. For example, a man wants to push another one, and
he does it a bit too strongly and the other man falls and possibly by some unfortunate
coincidence dies. But this is also ignorance, because he did not have the intention of
pushing him harsh[ly].
Now it is clear that the things universally bad of which Aristotle has spoken before, like
murder and so on, are bad only if they are done knowingly and intentionally, and this is
the difference between human actions, morally relevant actions, and other bad things like
food. For example, bad food has its bad effect regardless of whether you take it
knowingly or unknowingly, intentionally or nonintentionally. So now Aristotle has
reached the point where he can suggest a definition of the voluntary or spontaneous,
which he does in the immediate sequel.
Reader:
Since that which is done under compulsion or by reason of ignorance is not spontaneous,
the spontaneous viii would seem to be that of which the moving principle is in the agent

vii
viii

See Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §§406-424.
In Ross’s translation: “involuntary, the voluntary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

242

itself, he being aware of the particular circumstances of the action. Presumably acts done
by reason of anger or appetite are not rightly called non-spontaneous.ix (1111a11-25)
LS: The two terms used by Aristotle are those used by Plato in the Republic: thymos and
epithymia; usually translated “spiritedness” and “desire.” Here Aristotle speaks of an
error. There are some people who say [that] actions committed from anger and from
desire are nonspontaneous, because these affections themselves, spiritedness and desire,
are involuntary. But Aristotle rejects this view for a number of reasons. Yes?
Reader:
For in the first place, on that showing none of the other animals will act spontaneously, x
nor will children; and secondly, is it meant that we do not spontaneously do xi any of the
acts that are due to appetite or anger, or that we do the noble acts spontaneously and the
base acts unspontaneously?xii Is not this absurd, when one and the same thing is the
cause? But it would surely be odd to describe as non-spontaneousxiii things one ought to
desire; and we ought both to be angry at certain things and to have an appetite for certain
things, e.g. for health and for learning. Also, what is non-spontaneousxiv is thought to be
painful, but what is in accordance with appetite is thought to be pleasant. (1111a22-33)
LS: Let us make a stop here. Aristotle, I think, gives here two arguments. If what we do
from anger and desire were involuntary, that would make all actions of brutes and of
children involuntary, and this does not correspond to what we think and see. For
example, we see the difference between what the puppy does voluntarily, spontaneously,
gladly, and what he does under compulsion of some sort. Secondly, what we do from
desire or anger is spontaneous. For instance, we desire the right things in the right
circumstances, and then we act well, and then we demand credit for it. The argument
which Aristotle rejects would lead to the consequence that we claim responsibility for our
good actions and disclaim responsibility for our bad actions. If we act nicely, we say: of
course I did it. But if we do something bad, we say: Well, something else did it, not me.
In other words, if this view were correct, all actions prompted by desire and spiritedness
would be good or at least excusable, contrary to the universal view of mankind.
And what he says at the end of this sections means, I think, [that] at most one could say
that the things which are done through anger are involuntary, for the things done out of
desire are pleasant and hence voluntary. But of course, even regarding anger Aristotle
does not agree that they are voluntary. And he gives now a third argument.
Reader:
Again, what is the difference in respect of involuntariness between errors committed
upon calculation and those committed in anger? Both are to be avoided, but the irrational
ix

In Ross’s translation: “involuntary.”
In Ross’s translation: “voluntarily.”
xi
In Ross’s translation: “do voluntarily.”
xii
In Ross’s translation: “voluntarily and the base acts involuntarily.”
xiii
In Ross’s translation: “involuntary.”
xiv
In Ross’s translation: “involuntary.”
x

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

243

passions are thought not less human than reason is, and therefore also the actions which
proceed from anger or appetite are the man’s actions. It would be odd then to treat them
as non-spontaneous.xv (1111a33-b3)
LS: If actions from anger or spiritedness are involuntary, why not also actions from
calculation? All human actions which have their origin in a mature human being are
voluntary. This is the point which Aristotle makes here. While all such human actions are
voluntary, not all voluntary actions are human; there are also voluntary actions of beasts,
as we have seen. There is here a certain obscurity to which I referred, I think, before. The
voluntary or spontaneous is common to all animals, but Aristotle speaks, in fact, of the
specifically human voluntary and involuntary actions, especially when he speaks of those
done from ignorance. The reason why Aristotle is concerned with it is this: a human act
may be spontaneous but not deliberately chosen. That is the practical importance of this
discussion. Think of the difference between murder—premeditated murder, a homicide in
anger—and wholly guiltless killing induced through ignorance. We must make these
distinctions. And therefore the distinction between voluntariness on the one hand, and
premeditation or what Aristotle will call in the sequel election or choice [on the other], is
of crucial importance.
Incidentally, those of you who are interested in this subject should read Plato’s Laws,
860c to 864a. This is of special importance because Plato or the Athenian Stranger argues
there on the basis of the Socratic premise that all evil is due to ignorance, and therefore
there cannot be the distinction which Aristotle makes. And the Athenian Stranger can
accept this commonsense distinction only in a kind of adaptation to what the laws
generally prescribe:2 they make a distinction between bad actions deliberately done, and
bad actions spontaneously done, and bad actions done under sheer compulsion. Yes?
Student: Does not Aristotle also agree that no man will willingly choose to harm
himself?
LS: Yes, Aristotle would admit that.
Same Student: And that therefore, if a man does something which will harm his soul,
that it’s because he is ignorant either of the existence or of the importance of the soul?
LS: Yes. How much Aristotle is in agreement with Socrates, despite the considerable
difference, you see especially from the seventh book, where the discussion of continence
and incontinence [occurs]. I mean, the fact which for us is so easy, that someone says that
he approves of the better course but in fact follows the worse course, that is a problem for
Aristotle. How is this compatible with his knowing the better course? And Aristotle says,
without some obfuscation, that’s impossible.
Same Student: That’s passion.
LS: Yes, but it is an obfuscation of the intellect which takes place.
xv

In Ross’s translation: “involuntary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

244

Same Student: Passions are an obfuscation of intellect.
LS: Yes, but the key point is that it is an obfuscation. We are inclined to think of
criminals or other wicked men [as men] who have perfect clarity, are in full knowledge of
what they are doing, and yet some evil in them overpowers them. And this is denied by
Aristotle, too: even if they know it, there must be some obfuscation taking place,
otherwise they couldn’t do it.
Same Student: . . . Plato.
LS: Yes, this was for Plato. But Aristotle comes here amazingly close to Plato, as you
will see from seventh book, if we have the time to read it now. Good. We have now
reached the conclusion of the section on the spontaneous and nonspontaneous, and to
repeat the main point: spontaneity is destroyed for the time being by compulsion and by
ignorance, ignorance meaning ignorance of relevant circumstances, not of the
fundamental law itself. This does not take away spontaneity. Yes. Now let’s go on.
Reader:
Both the spontaneous and the unspontaneous xvi having been delimited, we must next
discuss choice; for it is thought to be most closely bound up with virtue, and to
discriminate characters better than actions do. (1111b4-6)
LS: Yes, let us stop here one moment. Now Aristotle at the beginning of this book, as
you will have seen, has not given us a sufficient reason why he speaks of the spontaneous
and nonspontaneous. Here he gives us a precise reason. “Choice,” as he translates, is of
the utmost importance. It is the core of virtue. For there may be good external actions
proceeding from bad choices; for example, if someone does something good out of
vainglory or [out] of calculation. And bad external actions or bad omissions may be
based on good choices; for example, if someone is unable to do the right thing because he
is paralyzed in his body.
In order to understand this section as well as what precedes it, we must always remember
the fact that there is no Greek word, surely no Aristotelian word, for will. What we would
call will is called by Aristotle “choice,” and this is not a faculty of the soul, but it is
always an act of choice. The faculty is something like [an] appetitive or desiring faculty,
of which you will hear something very soon. Yes?
Reader:
Choice, then, seems to be spontaneous, but not the same thing as the spontaneous;xvii The
latter extends more widely. For both children and the lower animals share in

xvi
xvii

In Ross’s translation: “the voluntary and the involuntary.”
In Ross’s translation: “voluntary, but not the same thing as voluntary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

245

spontaneousxviii action, but not in choice, and acts done on the spur of the moment we
describe as spontaneous,xix but not as chosen.
LS: Here Aristotle makes clear why he had discussed first the spontaneous. In technical
language, the spontaneous is the genus of which the objects of choice are a species. Every
choice is spontaneous, but not every spontaneous act is a choice. And he gives two
examples: first, the animals, which have spontaneity but no choice; and secondly, the
things which we do all of a sudden, which are spontaneous or may be spontaneous and
yet [are] not acts of choice. He will explain in the sequel what choice is. Yes?
Reader:
Those who say it is appetite or anger or wish—
LS: “It,” namely, choice. Yes?
Reader:
or a kind of opinion do not seem to be right. For choice is not common to irrational
creatures as well.
LS: Now one second. So this is the theme for the discussion. In order to make clear what
choice is, Aristotle shows in the sequel that it is neither desire, nor anger, nor wish, nor
opinion, and by excluding these alternatives he will find out what choice truly is. Now
begin again at the point, please, “for choice is not common also to the irrational animals.”
Reader:
But appetite and anger are. Again, the incontinent man acts with appetite, but not with
choice; while the continent man on the contrary acts with choice, but not with appetite.
Again, appetite is contrary to choice, but not appetite to appetite. Again, appetite relates
to the pleasant and the painful, choice neither to the painful nor to the pleasant.
Still less is it anger; for acts due to anger are thought to be less than any others objects of
choice. (1111b6-19)
LS: Let us stop here. Now the first reason we have already discussed. The second is this:
the case of the continent [man] and [the] incontinent man. Now the continent man differs
from the moderate man in this, that the moderate man does not have the desire for excess
or defect regarding sensual pleasures, whereas the continent man has desire for it but
controls himself . . . And the incontinent man is a man who knows that he should not
drink this other bottle of whisky: he knows it, but he is unable to control that. Otherwise
the argument doesn’t make sense. In this case it becomes very clear that the choice and
the desire are very different things. Do you see that? In the case of the continent man, he
chooses not to eat this additional steak, but he desires it. And in the case of the
incontinent man, just the opposite: his choice is not to eat that other steak, but his desire
is clearly for that delicious thing. Yes?
xviii
xix

In Ross’s translation: “voluntary.”
In Ross’s translation: “voluntary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

246

Student: He says in the next sentence that sensual desire . . . opposed to choice. Yet I
wonder why this is, because it doesn’t appear necessarily so. After all, that other steak,
though desired, may after all be good for one.
LS: Then his choice was unreasonable. He should have chosen more food.
Same Student: Passion and right reason can accidentally run together, can they not? One
can, after all, be passionate for—
LS: Yes, well, that is a fortunate accident. But in the case of the good men, they agree,
because they have been made to agree by proper breeding and proper principles.
Same Student: A good man has the right passions.
LS: Yes, if you call that passions, but passions are properly controlled.
Same Student: What about erōs?
LS: Aristotle is silent on that subject. One can say (if this is not disrespectful, but I have
said it in other cities, so I may repeat it in southern California as well) that one of the
great charms of Aristotle, disregarding entirely the question of truth or untruth, but what
attracts some people, many people to Aristotle is something which is very attractive in a
famous English writer, and that is Jane Austen. There is a very great sense of propriety in
both cases, and I know that this is not in fashion today, but still I must own that I think it
is a very fine thing. There are so many sentences in Miss Austen’s discussions of whether
A should marry B or not which, when you state it baldly, in theoretical terms can be
matched by sentences from the Ethics. There is only one difference which I must note.
For Jane Austen, [for a man] to marry a woman or for a woman to marry a man without
loving him or her is plainly immoral. For Aristotle that is not true. For Aristotle, the
proper relation is that the groom should be thirty-seven and the bride seventeen—do I
remember that correctly? More or less. And this is to be arranged by prudent people,
namely, the parents. And the love will come after marriage; it is not to be a condition of
marriage. This is still more old-fashioned than Jane Austen. Good.
Same Student: I wasn’t talking about that side of erōs. I was talking about a Platonic
erōs.
LS: Aristotle speaks in a more pedestrian manner of a striving for knowledge, and of
course also other strivings: strivings for food, and for procreation, and so on. Now this
poetic quality, if only speaking speaking externally in Plato is not in the foreground in
Aristotle. There is no question.
Now he seems to say something very strange in the passage which we read: desire
contradicts the choice, but desire does not contradict desire. This seems to be sheer
nonsense. We all know that we can have contradictory desires; say, a desire for money

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

247

and then a desire for reputation, and they can easily conflict if we cannot get the money
in an honorable manner. But I think this refers still to the question of the continent [man]
and [the] incontinent man. Both choose what is contrary to their desire, but there is no
conflict in them between desires. The desire goes in both cases, in the case of the
continent as well as of the incontinent, to the bottle of whisky, but they act differently in
this respect. Yes. And now the other point he makes here is that desire goes to the
pleasant, but choice as choice goes to the good or to the noble. As for spiritedness, or
anger in particular, what we do from anger is different from what we do from choice.
This is at any rate the accepted opinion on the subject. Remember what he said before of
the suddenness of anger. And choice is not sudden but follows deliberation. So let’s go
on here.
Reader:
But neither is it, that is, choice, wishing,xx though it seems near to it; for choice cannot
relate to impossible things,xxi and if anyone said he chose them he would be thought silly;
but there may be a wish even for impossible things, xxii e.g. for immortality.
LS: “For immortality” is not a denial of immortality here but means simply not dying,
never dying; which is admittedly absurd, even on the premise of the immortality of the
soul. Yes?
Reader:
And wish may relate to things that could in no way be brought about by one’s own
efforts, e.g. that a particular actor or athlete should win in a competition; but no one
chooses such things, but only the things that he thinks could be brought about by his own
act.xxiii Again, wish relates rather to the end, choice to the means; for instance, we wish to
be healthy, but we choose the acts which will make us healthy, and we wish to be happy
and say we do, but we cannot well say we choose to be so; for, in general, choice seems
to relate to the things that are in our own power. (1111b19-30)
LS: Yes. Now this, I think, is a clear statement, but I will emphasize here one thing. We
have discussed the relation of happiness and virtue before, in the first book, and now we
hear something which was not said before, which is very important, regarding the radical
difference between happiness and virtue. Happiness is an object of wish, not of choice,
because happiness does not depend on us, and therefore, we recall, Aristotle called it
“worthy of reverence” because it is a blessing. And by a blessing we understand
something which we have not earned or gained by our own effort. Virtue on the other
hand has to do with the things relating to the end, not with the end itself. That is hard to
see, or is it not so hard? You seem to have a thought? Yes?

xx

In Ross’s translation: “But neither is it wish.”
In Ross’s translation: “impossibles.”
xxii
In Ross’s translation: “impossibles.”
xxiii
In Ross’s translation: “efforts.”
xxi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

248

Student: But for the man who has not yet been habituated to be virtuous, could not virtue
be an end in that he wishes to be virtuous and he is in effect educating himself to be
virtuous?
LS: Yes, that could be. But still, this is a more universal statement; in other words, even
this virtue—generally speaking, something may be an end within a certain horizon and
yet a means in a larger horizon. Say, the shoemaker in his workshop, completely
dedicated to his shop: for him the shoes would be the end—perhaps also the money
which he gets from them, but let us assume the shoes alone. And yet, if we take a
somewhat wider perspective, then we see immediately [that] the shoes are only means for
the good condition of the feet; more generally stated, for the good condition of the body.
And it could be that within a certain perspective virtue [would be] the end, and it would
not be the end from a larger perspective. But Aristotle does not say here that virtue is not
the end. Aristotle says [that] virtue has to do with the means, and the reason is this: virtue
is a habit of properly choosing, of properly preferring, and what we choose or prefer are
means and not the ends. And the argument of Aristotle is very simple, as you have seen
partly and will see. The physician takes the end for granted: health. He doesn’t deliberate
about that, but he deliberates about how he can make a given patient healthy. Generally
speaking, and we have to repeat this point later on, choosing, preferring, is not limited to
moral things. Preference occurs also in the arts, as you will see, and is in a way indicated
by the example of the physician. Yes?
Student: If virtue is a habit of properly choosing, properly preferring, and choice is
conscious preference, then what must be trained in order for the habit to occur is not just
that faculty in man which can wish or prefer, but that faculty in man which can think. In
other words, there appear to be two things necessary: the training of the intellect, as well
as the training of the passions. So virtue has to do with—you can’t separate them, the
intellectual and the moral. You can’t get moral virtue without intellectual virtue,
otherwise you’re not conscious of—
LS: Yes, well, you cannot separate [them], but you must distinguish [them].
Same Student: Yes, all right.
LS: That is one thing. Secondly, there is a difference between that intellectual virtue
without which there cannot be moral virtue (and that is what Aristotle calls phronesis; in
Latin prudentia, practical wisdom) and the other intellectual virtues (sophia, epistēmē;
wisdom, science) not required for morality.
Same Student: You cannot have moral virtue without some intellectual virtue.
LS: Yes, but Aristotle is precise: practical wisdom. I mean, you do not need theoretical
wisdom.
Same Student: Yet the thing . . . involve—I could imagine a morally significant choice
having more of a strictly moral significance and one having more of an intellectual

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

249

significance. I can imagine gradations, you know. So for each one of these things,
perhaps the intellectual virtue could be more or less important.
LS: But intellectual virtue is too broad a term. You should speak of practical wisdom,
because that according to Aristotle is the only intellectual virtue which is essential to
morality. The others are not essential, and nor is moral virtue essential to the other
theoretical virtues. Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: We’re speaking of practical questions and distinguishing between practical
questions and, say, theoretical questions. But aren’t there some questions which somehow
blend these two together? I was thinking for instance of someone trying to decide what
was best for them—
LS: For?
Same Student: For him, say. For a person trying to decide what is best for him.
LS: For him. Sure.
Same Student: That seems to be a question which is not only practical or theoretical.
LS: For Aristotle, that is one hundred percent practical. We come to that very soon. You
are slightly impatient. In other words, if I may say it now in general terms, practical
questions are questions which take place within a limited horizon from Aristotle’s point
of view, namely, as Aristotle will say later on, the Spartans do not deliberate about what
institutions are good for the Scythians.xxiv That is their business. So you remain within
your own horizon. You do not deliberate about how I will meet my tax bill on April 15;
that’s my business. Good. But the theoretical questions in Aristotle do not have in this
sense a horizon.
Same Student: But then that would be radically different from the Socratic . . .
LS: Why?
Same Student: Well, I mean, you would make them . . . yourself.
LS: No, the difference is this: that Socrates, or Plato, in contradistinction to Aristotle,
asserts—Socrates and Plato call philosophy itself phronesis: practical wisdom, prudence.
So it seems to be that for Socrates–Plato, the whole, all knowledge, is—if it is not merely
technical, [if it does not] belong to the arts, and the arts always [depend] on a higher
tribunal, because who makes the distinction between the shoemaker and the beautician,
telling us that the shoemaker is truly an artisan whereas the beautician is a flatterer, that’s
again done by practical wisdom. So everything is under the control of practical wisdom.

xxiv

1112a28-29.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

250

But why is that? Because when we we come to such things as the universals in practice,
like murder and so on mentioned by Aristotle before, or any other universals he mentions,
has mentioned, or will mention, then Socrates says—well, for example, [that] courage is
good, justice is good, is taken for granted here. And Socrates in the Republic, for
example, discusses at great length the question whether justice is truly good. So for
Socrates–Plato the practical questions shift insensibly into what Aristotle would call—
and perhaps Plato too, let us leave that open—theoretical, whereas Aristotle says, “No,
the practical sphere has a limit or a horizon of its own.” And the difficulty to which I
referred on an earlier occasion, that it is necessary in fact at all times to defend sound
practice against wrong theories, this does not constitute a dependence of practice on
theory but is extraneous to practice, although very important for practice. So a man
refuting Marxist doctrines, for example, does a theoretical job, there’s no doubt about it,
and it has to be, because a Marxist doctrine is a theoretical doctrine, although that’s a bit
complicated, but it is nevertheless a theoretical doctrine. But by [doing] this he does not
give guidance to action, only negatively: he takes away a delusion. The guidance for
action must come from the principles of action themselves.
Student: . . . defending sound practice from right theory.
LS: Pardon? What did you say?
Same Student: I said I was thinking more of defending sound practice from right theory.
LS: Yes, but in Aristotle there is no right theory. You find more of theory in this sense in
the Politics perhaps than in the Ethics. That would require a very complicated work of
interpretation, which to my knowledge has never been done, to lay bare the theoretical
premises of the Ethics. I mean, not those which are simply taken over from psychology
and so, but those which are the theoretical principles of ethics for ethics.
Now let’s go on. The difference between choice and the other things has been made, and
now he will show the difference between choice and opinion in b30.
Reader:
For this reason, too, choicexxv cannot be opinion; for opinion is thought to relate to all
kinds of things, no less to eternal things and impossible things than to things in our own
power. (1111b30-33)
LS: That is clear. So opinion is by its own nature universal. We opine or can opine about
everything. We cannot make choices in every respect but only in things within our reach,
and so on. Yes?
Reader:
And opinionxxvi is distinguished by its falsity or truth, not by its badness or goodness,
while choice is distinguished rather by these.
xxv
xxvi

In Ross’s translation: “it.”
In Ross’s translation: “it.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

251

Now with opinion in general, perhaps no one even says it is identical.
LS: So in other words, this is not the issue, whether choice and opinion can be identified,
but the question is whether choice is not an opinion on certain subjects. And that’s the
question which Aristotle discusses in the sequel.
Reader:
But it is not identical even with any kind of opinion; for by choosing what is good
or bad, we are men of a certain character, which we are not by holding certain
opinions. And we choose to get or avoid something good or bad, but we have
opinions about what a thing is or whom it is good for or how it is good for him;
we can hardly be said to opine to get or avoid anything. And choice is praised for
being related to the right object rather than for being rightly related to it, opinion
for being truly related to its object. And we choose what we best know to be good,
but we opine what we do not quite know; and it is not the same people that are
thought to make the best choices and to have the best opinions, but some are
thought to have fairly good opinions but, by reason of vice to choose what they
should not. (1111b33-1112a11)
LS: Now let us stop here for a moment. We are called good and bad not because of our
opinions on good and bad but because of our choices. Now this seems to be too
sweeping, because sometimes we say a man is a bad man because of the things he says.
Think of the case of Machiavelli: people usually do not refer to his actions but to his
opinions, and they call him a bad man. Now let us therefore say [that] we are called good
or bad less because of our opinions than because of our choices. For example, someone
might derive pleasure from bothering people with shocking opinions and all the time act
decently. No one would call him a bad man, but one would say he is perhaps an illmannered man, or [perhaps] not even that. Never forget that expressing one’s opinion,
i.e., speaking, is an action. And Aristotle doesn’t speak here of speaking, but of opining.
Now choice goes towards taking or leaving. Opinion is opinion even on good or bad
things [and] does not culminate in taking or leaving. What Aristotle has here in mind is
not the present-day distinction between facts and values or factual and value judgments.
Both fact judgments and value judgments are opinions, of course, in Aristotle’s sense.
For instance, “This is a beautiful painting”; “This is a desirable apple.” These are all
opinions because they in themselves do not mean that you give yourself, as it were, the
command: Grab it. Only when you do that is it a choice. Now choice goes toward what is
correct. Opinion goes toward what is true. He has already spoken of that before.
There is another point, which I repeat. We choose what we know most certainly, to the
highest degree, that it is good. But we opine also about things of which we know nothing.
So proairesis, choice, is essentially certain. Opinion is not essentially certain; most of our
opinions are quite uncertain. This subject will be taken up by Aristotle later on: I refer
you now to 1139b15 to 18. Choice is the core of action, and the good choice is certain, in
spite of the many uncertainties regarding the event. That has nothing to do with it. I

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

252

mean, if I make a choice, a good choice, a proper choice, then I have full certainty
regarding the goodness of the action, not regarding the event. The event may be terrible.
That no one can foresee. Unless the event can be foreseen at the time, then I’m of course
responsible for it. Now the fact that this moral choice should be so certain seems to be
incompatible with the instability of all human things, of which Aristotle had spoken so
powerfully before. The solution to this difficulty is this: the moral truth resides in the
individual case. Yes. I think that is all I have to say on this point. Let us read the end of
the section.
Reader:
If opinion precedes choice or accompanies it, that makes no difference; for it is not this
that we are considering, but whether itxxvii is identical with some kind of opinion.
What, then, and what kind of thing is it, since it is none of the things we have mentioned?
It seems to be spontaneous, but not all that is spontaneousxxviii can be an object of choice.
Is it, then, what has been decided on by previous deliberation? At any rate choice
involves a rational principle and thought. Even the name seems to suggest that it is what
is chosen before other things. (1112a11-17)
LS: In Greek, proairesis, and pro means “before.” And that is an etymology of Aristotle
on which his doctrine does not in any way depend. But the main point he makes: the
object of choice is that spontaneous thing which has been deliberated upon before. And
therefore the next subject is, if you want to understand choice, deliberation, because we
can choose only such things as are properly subjects of deliberation. And since
deliberation is prior to the choice, the choice being the final act of deliberation, we have
now to investigate deliberation.
Now as to what Aristotle says here at the beginning of the passage now read at 9 to 11
about whether opinion precedes choice or accompanies it, Thomas Aquinas makes this
distinction: as such, opinion precedes election, meaning you cannot possibly elect,
choose, if you don’t have some opinion about the goodness or the badness of the things
you choose. But accidentally, the opposite might be true. For example, when a man
changes his opinion as a consequence of his affections.xxix Say, he falls in love with a girl
(if it is a boy): this is not something deliberately induced by him, and it changes his
opinions about that girl. You should know this from a long and famous literature on this
subject.
Now let us then turn to the analysis of deliberation, which comes now. Again I remind
you of the fact that Aristotle speaks here, of course, about choice and deliberation in
order to make us understand morality. But the phenomena of choice and deliberation go
beyond the sphere of morality, namely, they extend into the arts, for instance, into
medicine, hardly to the shoemaker’s art. Aristotle will speak about that very soon. Now
go on Mr. Fairbanks.
xxvii

In Ross’s translation: “choice.”
In Ross’s translation: “voluntary, but not all that is voluntary.”
xxix
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §456.
xxviii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

253

Reader:
Do we deliberate about everything, and is everything a possible subject of deliberation, or
is deliberation impossible about some things? We ought presumably to call not what a
fool or madman would deliberate about, but what a sensible man would deliberate
about—
LS: In other words, that is a commonsensical exclusion, because there may be certain
kinds of madmen who deliberate, but this is not the normal case of deliberation and
therefore we may dismiss it. I think if you have read the books by the English humorist,
the author of Jeeves and the other works, I forgot his name at the moment—
Student: P. G. Wodehouse.xxx
LS: Wodehouse. The humor is precisely that here fools are deliberating about
preposterous things. In other words, Jeeves is regarded as a very prudent man by this
young nobleman—what’s his name?
Student: Bertie Wooster.
LS: Bertie Wooster. Thank you very much. It’s really deplorable that I didn’t remember.
Bertie Wooster deliberates upon all kinds of things. But Aristotle rightly relegates these
things into the background. Now go on.
Reader:
Now about eternal things no one deliberates, e.g. about the material universe or the
incommensurability—
LS: “Material” is a terrible word. Well, I wouldn’t have translated it “about eternal
things,” but “about sempiternal things,” “no one deliberates about the cosmos.” What
shall I do with the cosmos? Yes? [Laughter]
Reader:
or the incommensurability of the diagonal and the side of the square.
LS: In other words, how can I change that?
Reader:
But no more do we deliberate about the things that involve movement but always happen
in the same way, whether of necessity or by nature or from any other cause, e.g. the
solstices and the rising of the stars; nor about things that happen now in one way, now in
another, e.g. droughts and rains; nor about chance events, like the finding of treasure. But
we do not deliberate even about all human affairs. (1112a18-28)

xxx

P. G. Wodehouse (1881-1975), English writer and humorist.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

254

LS: “About human” should be emphasized. These things were all not strictly speaking
human. Yes?
Reader:
For instance, no Spartan deliberates about the best constitution for the Scythians. For
none of these things can be brought about by our own actions.
LS: Let us stop here for the moment. So we deliberate only about human things. “Human
things,” incidentally, means something very different from human nature, because we
don’t deliberate about human nature either, but about things subject to human action. We
may say, in order to explain Aristotle a bit better, [that] deliberating presupposes caring. I
mean, sometimes you don’t care very deeply, but if you do not to some degree care, you
do not deliberate. And therefore the Greek comic poets coined a term called
merimnosophistai,xxxi “the wise men who worry,” namely, those who worry about
whether the universe has come into being out of atoms or out of something else, worriers
about things about which sensible men would not worry. That’s of course a comical
expression. Aristotle would say [that] worry [has its] place within a certain sphere, and in
this sphere we deliberate. Yes?
Reader:
We deliberate about things that are in our power and can be done; and these are in fact
what is left. For nature, necessity, and chance are thought to be causes, and also reason
and everything that depends on man. Now every class of men deliberate about the things
that can be done by their own efforts.
LS: So what is subject to human deliberation as such is different, of course, from what is
subject to deliberation by this particular man. That is the difference to which he appeals
here. Now when he speaks here about nature and necessity he may mean by nature, form,
and by necessity, matter. But at any rate, this is not terribly important for our present
purpose. Now go on.
Reader:
And in the case of exact and self-contained sciences there is no deliberation, e.g. about
the letters of the alphabet (for we have no doubt about how they should be written); but
the things that are brought about by our own efforts, but not always in the same way, are
the things about which we deliberate, e.g. questions of medical treatment or of moneymaking. And we do so more in the case of the art of navigation than in that of
gymnastics, inasmuch as it has been less exactly worked out, and again about other things
in the same ratio, and more also in the case of the arts than in that of the sciences; for we
have more doubt about the former. (1112a28-b8)
LS: Yes. So there is then deliberation in those arts which are not exact. Now “exact” not
in the sense of mathematica, but in the sense of giving room, and frequently room for
doubt. For example, in reading and writing, we do not deliberate; either we know how to
xxxi

See Aristophanes, Clouds 101. The term that appears there is merimnophrontistai; the word
Strauss uses (merminosophistai) is apparently drawn from a scholiast’s gloss on that passage.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

255

write and to read, or we don’t. And even the children while learning it do not strictly
speaking deliberate about it: should this be an i or a y. They wonder about it, but that’s
not deliberation. Now he mentions here the example of of the physician, which is quite
obvious up to the present time. One speaks of the physician’s concilium, which is the
Latin word for deliberation. Then they go into a huddle, to use a somewhat more popular
expression.
He mentions here the art of moneymaking: surely, there great uncertainties exist—you
read it in the daily papers—and therefore [there is] need for deliberation. Aristotle does
not mention the economic or political art here, as you see, and one may well wonder why
not, because deliberation is there. Surely it’s at the center according to the political
doctrine of Aristotle. The central function of the ruling body is to deliberate, of course; to
deliberate so as to decide eventually. This is, by the way, of some interest, that what
Aristotle calls the deliberative function would today be called decision-making. Now
Aristotle means of course that the deliberation should lead to a decision. But, on the other
hand, the people who speak of decision do not necessarily think of the deliberation
preceding the decision. I never found out who made the term “decision” so popular in
present-day political science. xxxii It may be Lasswell, but I do not know. Someone should
look into that, if he has the time. Now let us go on where we left off.
Reader:
Deliberation is concerned with things that happen in a certain way for the most part, but
in which the event is obscure, and with things in which it is indeterminate.
LS: What does that mean? Thomas gives this example: one does not deliberate as to
whether a stone bridge which one has to cross will not collapse, because then it becomes
infinite.xxxiii But of course, if the thing which has to cross a bridge is a tank, then you
have to deliberate . . . experts. But one deliberates about a marriage. There are certain
general rules about marriage—what kind of a woman is preferable to what kind of man—
but uncertainty as to the outcome, because some people prove to be different after
marriage than before the marriage. And therefore deliberation, at least in former times.
[Laughter] Good. Now let us go on.
Reader:
We call in others to aid us in deliberation on important questions, distrusting ourselves, as
not being equal to deciding. (1112b8-11)
LS: The implication is [that the] object of deliberation must be of a certain magnitude. A
sign of it is that we drag in others. For example, we would not deliberate [about] whether
we should buy this or that tie. We might hesitate for a moment, but this is not the proper
subject of deliberation. Yes?
xxxii

See Strauss’s discussion of this concept in his 1940 lecture “The Living Issues of Postwar
German Philosophy,” reprinted in Heinrich Meier, Leo Strauss and the Theologico-Political
Problem, trans. Marcus Brainard (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 115-39,
especially 126-28.
xxxiii
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §470.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

256

Reader:
We deliberate not about ends but about means. For a doctor does not deliberate whether
he should heal, nor an orator whether he shall persuade, nor a statesman whether he shall
produce law and order, nor does anyone else deliberate about his end. They assume the
end and consider how and by what means it is to be attained; and if it seems to be
produced by several means they consider by which it is most easily and best produced,
while if it is achieved by one only they consider how it will be achieved by this and by
what means this will be achieved, till they come to the first cause, which in the order of
discovery is last.
LS: Yes. Now let us stop here. So you see again that deliberation occurs of course also in
the arts, and not only in action proper. So what we do is this. The act of deliberation is
therefore analyzed by Aristotle, but I mention here only one point. He says that we try to
find out through which instrumentality [the end] can come into being most easily and
most beautifully. “Most easily” doesn’t need explanation; “most beautifully” meaning
without any detraction from the desired thing. There is a passage in Plato of which one
cannot help thinking in this connection. That is in the Republic 541a, when he says how
the best city will come into being: after the philosophers have taken power, they expel
everyone older than ten from the city so that they are not encumbered by the power of
tradition, and so they would make the city and [the] regime best in the quickest as well as
easiest way. He could have said also in the finest way . . . Also in the earlier discussions
in the Republic, in book 2, for example, in 370a and b, where he speaks of the
introduction of the arts in the simple city, the city of pigs, similar terms occur: how things
are to be done more beautifully and more easily. And the answer is: by the radical
division of labor. The same consideration. Generally speaking, I believe it is important, in
trying to understand the Republic, to see that we have here, at least up to books 5, 6 or so,
a deliberation in the Aristotelian sense. Socrates, Glaucon, and so on deliberate on how to
build up in speech the perfect city. Good. Yes. And now he develops, explains here—let
us read the immediate sequel.
Reader:
For the person who deliberates seems to investigate and analyze in the way described as
though he were analysing a geometrical construction (not all investigation appears to be
deliberation—for instance, mathematical investigation—but all deliberation is
investigation). (1112b11-22)
LS: So in other words, deliberation is one species of investigation. Yes. And what is its
peculiarity in the sequel?
Reader:
And what is last in the order of analysis seems to be first in the order of becoming. And if
we come on an impossibility, we give up the search, e.g. if we need money and this
cannot be got; but if a thing appears possible we try to do it. By ‘possible’ things, I mean
things that might be brought about by our own efforts; and these in a sense include things
that can be brought about by the efforts of our friends, since the moving principle is in

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

257

ourselves. The subject of investigation is sometimes the instruments, sometimes the use
of them; and similarly in the other cases—sometimes the means, sometimes the mode of
using it or the means of bringing it about. It seems, then, as has been said, that man is a
moving principle of actions. (1112b22-32)
LS: Let us stop here. Now our wish is to spend a few weeks in a Caribbean island, and
then we deliberate about it. And one factor will be, at least in our time, whether we have
the money, and if we find out [that] we don’t have the money, then it is impossible. But
there is a way out: we may have friends who have money, and they might be willing to
finance this trip. Then it is feasible again. Other deliberations are more complicated and
deal with graver matters. For example, the deliberation made by a captain of a ship:
whom to save or not to save in the event the ship is lost.
Now in order to appreciate properly the sanity of Aristotle’s analysis, you should have a
look at Hobbes’s Leviathan, chapter 6, which deals with deliberation in the following
way:
“When in the mind of man, Appetites, and Aversions, Hopes and Feares, concerning one
and the same thing, arise alternatively; and divers good and evill consequences of the
doing, or omitting the thing propounded, come successively into our thoughts; so that
sometimes we have an Appetite to it; sometimes an Aversion from it; sometimes Hope to
be able to do it; sometimes Despaire, or Feare to attempt it; the whole summe of Desires,
Aversions, Hopes, and Feares, continued till the thing be either done, or thought
impossible, is that we call DELIBERATION.”xxxiv
So you see, in other words, it is just a purely subhuman process. Thinking plays no role,
although he uses the words “thought impossible.” But he might say the rats in certain
recent experiments also have thoughts, as quite a few contemporaries believe. And then
he gives some examples which are Aristotelian. Therefore of things past there is no
deliberation, because [they are] manifestly impossible to change, nor [about] things
known to be impossible, as Aristotle said before, or thought [to be] so, because men
know or think such deliberation vain. But of things impossible which we think possible,
we may deliberate, not knowing it is in vain. And it is called deliberation because it is a
putting an end to the liberty, de-liberation. [It is] the act of doing or omitting according to
our own appetite or aversion. This alternate succession of appetites, aversions, hopes, and
fears is no less in living creatures than man, and therefore these also deliberate. That’s
Hobbes, and not only Hobbes; that goes on up to the present day.
“In Deliberation, the last Appetite, or Aversion, immediately adhering to the action, or to
the omission thereof, is that wee call the WILL [. . .] And Beasts that have Deliberation,
must necessarily also have Will.”xxxv The definition of the will given commonly by the
schools (that it, is a rational appetite) is not good for if it were, then there could be no
voluntary act against reason. This is one of the characteristic misunderstandings of
Aristotle. Rational appetite doesn’t mean of course that it’s a good appetite, but it means
xxxiv
xxxv

Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (1651), part 1, chapter 6.
Leviathan, chapter 6.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 14

258

an appetite of a being which cannot help using or misusing reason. These very simple
things are here absolutely [. . .] So in other words, it is just a series of desires and
aversions. That which happens to come at the end—the last feather breaks the horse’s
neck, as he says occasionally: that is the will. But that this is a rational process in itself,
deliberation, is not admitted. And this has had a great effect, and perhaps at no time a
greater effect than in our age. Good.
I think we have to stop here, and we will go on next time. We won’t be able, I believe, to
finish the section of book 3 which I would like to read with you. But on the other hand,
we have no one with a whip behind us who tells us how much of the Ethics to read or not.
1
2

Moved “not only.”
Deleted “that.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

259

Session 15: April 1, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —in the meantime, there are a few points which I would like
to discuss.i “The activities of plants and animals are determined by necessity, by nature,
mechanistically.” But the latter expression is not correct, because “mechanistically” is
understood in contradistinction to “teleologically,” and it is of course in Aristotle
teleological, not mechanistic. In other words, there is a term of the growth which
beckons, as it were. It is is not pushed from behind. That would be mechanistic. Good.
Seven. “The virtuous man only deliberates as to how he will be virtuous.” Is this the way
in which a virtuous human being deliberates? I mean, is it clear now? It would be clearer
to say “as to what is the virtuous action in the circumstances.”
Student: I meant in contrast to why he should be virtuous.
LS: Oh, I see. Yes, that is correct. Now: “The deliberative process analyzes the end into
means and then attempts to actualize them.” Well, that is somewhat loose. For example,
you deliberate about whether to buy a house. Do you analyze the house into your finances
as one factor, or location, or whatever might be relevant?
Same Student: I was thinking more in terms of the end, whether general or universal; for
example, the idea of courage as being a virtue. But it would be analyzed into the
particular situation.
LS: Ya. But we do not always start from the virtue angle. We deliberate, for example,
about a house, about money, about where to study, and so on. And the consideration of
virtue comes in as a limiting factor: that certain means and ways are excluded a priori
because of their impropriety. We will speak of this on another occasion. There is one
more point: “The greatest thing is to undergo death for virtuous and noble ends, in
defense of one’s country, for example.” Now does Aristotle speak of defense of one’s
country?
Same Student: I don’t believe so in here, but—
LS: “Country” is, in Greek, the word patris, fatherland. It occurs once or twice later, but
it doesn’t occur in the discussion of courage. The only end of which he speaks is the
noble. The noble. But he does not speak of the country or the polis, which is quite
remarkable and connected with a very great difficulty. This is Mrs. Brown’s.
Mr. Peters? Well? No. Then, Mr. West, whom I espy there. “One must expect from a
science that degree of exactness which is appropriate to that science.” This is not the best
expression one could find. “Appropriate to the subject matter of that science.” Yes?
Good.
i

Strauss begins the session by commenting on students’ papers.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

260

“He concludes by comparing himself implicitly to the rhetorician.” This goes a bit too
far. There is a certain similarity, one could say. Well, comparing of course can cover that,
I grant you that. “In his explicit confrontation with such men, as for example, Callicles,
Aristotle speaks not in his own name, rather he quotes the venerable poet, Hesiod, in his
favor.” Is this quite true? If you remember the discussion in book 1 of whether honor is
the highest good, and where he shows that honor is dependent on virtue and so on, you
know, and therefore cannot be the highest good, this is an argument which would
probably not make any impression on Callicles because of his obsession but which would
make an impression on listeners who are not obsessed.
Student: Yes. Well, I mean, there are also a certain class of men who aren’t interested in
honor—
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: There’s also a class of men who, not being interested in honor, may only
be interested in simple—
LS: But even there he argues that they are after the pleasures of Sardanapal. This can be
stated in the form of an explicit argument: that they know only the pleasures of beasts,
and a human being is not a beast. Can you pass it on? Mr. Peters? All right, then you
must forget about it. Yes, Mr. Zinman.
Student: I was wondering whether I could ask for a clarification of a statement you made
last time in connection with a point raised by Mr. Wedergreen, I believe, about the
difference between Aristotle and Plato on the question of the distinction between
practical and theoretical virtues. You said at that time, or you raised the question as to
what are the theoretical principles of ethics as ethics, that is, the theorist’s principles of
ethics distinguishing those from the theoretical principles taken from, say, psychology or
metaphysics. I don’t quite understand what that means, and I was wondering if you—
LS: We must of course distinguish (that is implied in your question) between ethics, what
Aristotle does, and what the perfect gentleman does. The perfect gentleman does not have
at his disposal such an articulation of what virtue itself is and what the various virtues are
as Aristotle [does]. That goes without saying. This we presuppose. And now in the case
of Plato, Plato likes to call our good use of the understanding phronēsis, “practical
wisdom,” although this becomes very theoretical: for example, the question “What is
courage?”—as distinguished from the question “What is the courageous action here and
now?”—is already a theoretical question. And this goes higher and higher, and still Plato
calls it practical wisdom. Why? Because he denies that the distinction between practical
understanding and theoretical understanding is ultimately valid, because one shifts
insensibly into the other. For Aristotle, there is a clear distinction between theoretical
understanding and practical understanding: what the good man or statesman thinks is
practical wisdom, what the mathematician or physicist or metaphysician thinks is
theoretical wisdom. Now the question is: how are the two related? There is one medieval

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

261

tradition, represented for instance by Dante, according to which the ultimate principles of
which ethics makes use are supplied by theoretical reason, namely, the knowledge of the
end of man. It is as theoretical as the knowledge of the end of the horse, or of a tree, or
whatever else you take.
Now the transformation of this theoretical proposition, “this and this is the end of man,”
into a practical proposition, “this is what we should strive for,” that is the great question.
That is one of the most difficult questions of Aristotle’s Ethics, the question of the
cognitive status of the practical principles, and since Aristotle knew what he was doing, I
suppose that a solution can be reached if one digs deep enough and takes every relevant
thing into consideration. The most important book from this point of view is book 6,
which I think we should read after we have completed. We should also read book 5. But I
think we must always raise these questions. It is easy not to raise them, because many
things which Aristotle says are so convincing and obvious that one doesn’t think about
them. In what perspective is this particular thing said? Is this a theoretical statement or is
this a practical statement? I advisedly overstated the case at the beginning of this course
that there is no attempt on Aristotle’s part to refute Callicles in the way in which Plato
makes such efforts. It is a bit more complicated.
Student: I’ve been wanting to ask this for a bit. The difference between—well, the
dichotomy it seems that Aristotle might appear to draw in the Ethics. In fact, while it
exists on a practical level, that is, within a conventional political society, as you might
say the gentlemen would see it, nonetheless is in a sense subsumed into the theoretical
knowledge of the philosopher. If in fact the moral virtue can point the way to theoretical
knowledge, then it would seem that in the final analysis, at any rate, that moral virtue
becomes subsumed into theoretical knowledge, and that in fact the division, which at a
lower level existed, on a higher level doesn’t exist, that theoretical knowledge in fact
becomes practical knowledge.
LS: That was a very complicated and long statement, and I do not know where to begin.
But, for example, if you prove a mathematical theory: that there are certain moral
qualities required in order to do that—you must be awake, you should not be intoxicated,
and so on and so on—goes without saying. But that is not moral virtue proper because
your sobriety and whatever is entirely in the service of knowledge [and] is not its own
end as it would be in moral action proper, and this fundamental distinction is never
abandoned by Aristotle. I mean, if you have to do a good job in theoretical science or, for
that matter, in any art, however low, you must fulfill certain moral conditions. But this is
not morality proper; this is only a requirement of some practice and it is not chosen for its
own sake.
On a former occasion I gave you the example of the very first-rate carpenter who is drunk
most of the time, but when he works, when he is sober, he is superior to any other
carpenter. Well, the motive for his doing his excellent work is not the work itself but in
order to get money so that he can buy more whisky. You know? That does not derogate
from his quality as a carpenter. But in morality proper, the right action has to be done for

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

262

its own sake and not in order to get something for it. What is true of the arts applies also
to the sciences.
Same Student: Well, the only reason that I brought this up was, all right, you have a
gentleman, for example, who is practicing the moral virtues for the sake of the moral
virtues (now I’m kind of regurgitating your article a little bit), then in effect the
gentleman might ask himself: well, why moral virtue? Why is it good that I be morally
virtuous?
LS: Yes, but for this you have one answer which is, I think, good enough for all practical
purposes, and that is [that] a man who wants to have a reason for being decent has by this
very fact ceased to be decent. That is, I think, Aristotle’s view of the matter. One has to
consider the fact that there are false theories around which deny the importance of
morality, and which theories must be met by theoretical argument. This is true, and
therefore the question is: did Aristotle sufficiently consider this fact that the moral sphere
is only de jure, and not de facto self-sufficient? Mr. Shulsky?
Mr. Shulsky: It would seem that it’s not only false theories that threaten this practice,
but in a way, true theories too, because the whole questioning of decency puts one
outside the realm of being decent oneself, [yet] that would seem to be a prerequisite of
any sort of—
LS: All right, then let us discuss this example, which came up in connection with Mrs.
Brown’s paper. Why does a brave man face the dangers to his life? The answer given by
Aristotle: because of the nobility of the action. And Aristotle says first that the place of
courage is the field of battle; of course one can be courageous in other respects, toward
pain, toward disease, toward hunger, and so on and so on, but courage par excellence is
the courage on the field of battle. And the courageous man is the one who exposes his life
because it is noble to do so. He doesn’t go so far as Horace, who said, “dulce et decorum
est pro patria mori,”ii “it is sweet and decorous to die for the fatherland,” but only that
it’s decorous. But if you raise the question: but why this limitation of courage to courage
on the battlefield or in war, why that? Aristotle does not give you an answer, and I think
he did not do this not out of laxity but for a well-considered reason. Everyone can see the
reason which Aristotle doesn’t give, namely, that the defense of the country is of the
utmost importance. [It] is a dedication to the common good, which as such is more noble
than dedication to one’s own good. And that is it. But Aristotle remarkably does not say
that, although he knew it very well. So in other words, Aristotle does not trace the virtues
to the ends which ultimately legitimate the virtues from a theoretical point of view,
although of course he is aware of that. Is this sufficient as an answer?
Mr. Shulsky: Is that to be understood, the fact that Aristotle doesn’t trace these virtues to
their ultimate—
LS: Generally speaking, yes.
ii

Horace, Odes 3.2.13.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

263

Mr. Shulsky: . . . of the fact that any type of theory about—any type of theoretical
reasoning about these virtues is in some sense suspect or outside the realm of virtue
proper.
Another Student: Well, actually, indecent, that would seem to be the—the minute you
think about the reasons for decency, you become indecent. That’s kind of a repugnant
thing to say.
LS: Yes, well, it has its difficulties. But on the other hand, it makes some sense. It is
necessary to determine—when you have a certain custom, and people transgress it and
say that it is merely conventional or a fashion, i.e., it has no intrinsic necessity, then the
question arises: is this true? Does it or does it not have intrinsic necessity? And then one
has to go much deeper. Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: Then what you say, I think, is that the Aristotelian distinction between practical
and theoretical wisdom in fact leads to a Platonic blurring of that distinction because
ultimately, at least expressed theory, that is, written down or spoken, theoretical
arguments have to be only, if I understand you correctly, used to protect sound practice,
that is then for the sake of practice.
LS: Well, then let us consider what speaks in favor of Aristotle, an example which I
believe I mentioned on an earlier occasion: Plato’s Laches. A fellow comes to Athens
who has discovered a new kind of fighting technique, and he exhibits it. Two generals
look at it, and as it happens, one says it is a very good idea, and the other says it is a
ridiculous thing. And then Socrates is dragged in because, since the experts disagree, one
has to go beyond the sphere of the experts and drag in a layman. Socrates says: well, let
us first find out the purpose of all such techniques, and Socrates says (well, it’s a bit
forced, perhaps) that these things are in the service of courage, of producing the virtue of
courage. Now if we want to judge of a technique which serves this purpose, we must first
know what courage is. So they begin a discussion of courage, and the discussion does not
lead to an end, at least in that conversation; it probably would have gone on for quite
some time. Now what shall we do then? Shall we keep all practical questions in abeyance
until all theoretical questions are resolved? That wouldn’t work. And therefore, from this
point of view Aristotle presents a sound proposal: that there is a kind of ceiling beyond
which the practical man and the practical thinker as such does not have to go. That is
roughly the case for Aristotle, and which Plato also recognized in his way of course;
otherwise he could not have written the Laws in particular.
Same Student: But, I mean, he seems to set that ceiling rather high. I mean, for instance,
he could have set it at the level of strictly sense perception or something like that.
LS: Sense perception would not be sufficient under any circumstances.
Same Student: No. It seems like you’d either have to set it there or else—I’m stating an
extreme view, but—

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

264

LS: Why could there not be something like an unwritten law? I say advisedly unwritten
law and not natural law,iii which is sufficiently determinate for practical purposes,
although it is exposed to quite a few difficulties theoretically. And something of this
kind—1[though “unwritten law”] is not the Aristotelian expression for that, but it is only
a suggestion in order to make it a bit more clear what Aristotle is doing.
I suggest that we begin now with our reading, and I remind you briefly of the context.
The highest good, we have heard, is happiness. But the core of happiness is virtue. Virtue
is the habit of choosing or preferring. The thing chosen is a kind of the voluntary or
spontaneous; therefore Aristotle discusses first what is spontaneous and what is not
spontaneous. And the specific difference of choice from voluntary and involuntary things
as such is that choice is not desire, nor anger, nor wish, nor opinion. It is previously
deliberated (“premeditated” would not bring out precisely what Aristotle means).
Therefore he has to raise the question: what is the object of deliberation? Answer: only
such things as we, i.e., I or we here, can do or bring about. We do not deliberate about
things which we cannot achieve, which man as man cannot achieve, and we do not
deliberate about things which are of no concern to us. The sphere of deliberation is the
sphere where exact foresight is impossible; therefore there is deliberation of course not
only regarding actions but also regarding the arts, [in] those arts where exact foresight is
not possible. Therefore physicians deliberate, but shoemakers do not deliberate, or, to
give the Aristotelian example, nor do writers in the simple sense deliberate about their
writing, because the rules are strict and nothing needs to be done about that. Now I
suggest then that we go on, 1112b20. This still continues the discussion of deliberation.
Reader:
(For when deliberating one seems in the procedure described to be pursuing an
investigation or analysis that resembles the analysis of a figure in geometry—indeed it
appears that though not all investigation is deliberation, for example, mathematical
investigation is not, yet all deliberation is investigation—and the last step in the analysis
seems to be the first step in the execution of the design.)iv (1112b20-24)
LS: Literally, “in the coming-into-being.” The coming-into-being, for example, of that
figure or the coming-into-being of the action.
Reader:
Then, if they have come up against an impossibility, they abandon the project—for
instance, if it requires money and money cannot be procured; but if on the other hand it
proves to be something possible, they begin to act. By possible, I mean able to be
performed by our agency—things we do through the agency of our friends counting in a
sense as done by ourselves, since the origin of their action is in us.

iii

Here there is an extended break in the tape. The missing portion is taken from the original
transcript.
iv
The reader reads from Rackham’s translation.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

265

(In practising an art) the question is at one moment what tools to use, and at another how
to use them; and similarly in other spheres, we have to consider sometimes what means to
employ, and sometimes how exactly any given means are to be employed.
LS: So deliberation is a kind of investigation, but the opposite is of course not true,
because an investigation may be purely theoretical. The analysis goes to the deliberation
as to whether the thing is feasible for us. So deliberation concerns instruments (for
example, money) and the way of getting or using them, [and] thirdly, the human beings to
be persuaded, and so on. Yes, now?
Reader:
It appears therefore, as has been said, that a man is the origin of his actions, and that the
province of deliberation is to discover actions within one’s own power to perform; and all
our actions aim at ends other than themselves. It follows that we do not deliberate about
ends, but about means. Nor yet do we deliberate about particular facts, for instance, Is
this object a loaf? or, Is this loaf properly baked? for these are matters of direct
perception. Deliberation must stop at the particular fact, or we embark on an endless
process.v
The object of deliberation and the object of choice are the same, except that when a thing
is chosen it has already been determined, since it is the thing already selected as a result
of our deliberation that is chosen. For a man stops inquiring how he shall act as soon as
he has carried back the origin of action to himself, and to the dominant part of himself,
for it is this part that chooses. (1112b24-1113a7)
LS: In deliberation, we end when we have found the beginning of the action within our
capacity. “Within us”: we are the origin. We are responsible. The actions are for the sake
of something else. Is this unqualifiably true? Is this true in the case of the good actions
proper? From what we know, there seems to be a clear contradiction, a solution to which
we have not yet found. What Aristotle suggests in part of the passage—let the end be the
noble action on the battlefield—[is that] we deliberate: should this still be held at all
costs? And here the end is the noble action, but the end is given, and the noble action is
determined with a view to a different end. We must have more material before we can
clarify this point, but there is a general point which perhaps can be said in the following
way. Aristotle says on the one hand that the core of virtue is choice. Choice deals with
the means to the ends; that we have read here in this book. But later on in book 6 he will
say it is virtue which makes us see the end, and another faculty, also virtue but not moral
virtue, called practical wisdom, makes us see what is required for the end. This difficulty
we are not yet able to dispose of.
There must be a beginning of the deliberation. The beginning is of course the end. And
there must be an end to the deliberation, otherwise the deliberation would be in vain. The
question is, then, what—we are going back from the end to the means until we reach the
first step, and the first step is the last stage in deliberation and the first stage in the
v

In Rackham’s translation: “it will embark on a process ad infinitum.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

266

execution, the coming-into-being. Is this clear? Think of any deliberation that you are
engaged in and you will see that this is so.
Student: [. . .]
LS: Then what does Aristotle omit?
Same Student: [. . .]
LS: For instance, you come to another town where you have a job, let us say, and you
have to raise the question and to answer it: where to live? You need to find proper living
quarters. Then there are various alternatives, which you know as well as I do, and then
you discuss them. And you have to consider your finances, your conveniences, and
eventually you reach a point where you say: this is the only thing which is suitable. If
there are two things which are equally suitable, then you flip the coin.
Student: [. . .]
LS: You mean this end or more than one end? A variety of ends and they conflict with
each other, or what?
Student: Probably you would have several factors in mind.
LS: But would this not come in precisely in this process of deliberation, because [. . .]
need, and therefore you have to deliberate about how to get proper living quarters, what
is convenient and feasible for you. Then you see that this conflicts with another end: you
obviously have other needs which have to be addressed, and this requires some
deliberation about how to balance one’s budget. And this is a process of deliberation. I
believe the difficulty comes from an assertion frequently made: that every end can be a
means and every means can be an end. This is what Aristotle absolutely denies. There are
things which would be ends only for very unreasonable people or could be ends only
playfully. Take stamps: stamps are obviously means for getting your letter to the receiver.
These means can be made ends, in a way, by stamp collecting, but this is not something
quite serious. It can be very entertaining, but not a need as great as the postal system and
[. . .] Surely from Aristotle’s point of view there is no simple possibility of regarding all
means as ends and all ends as means. There are certain things which can only be regarded
as ends, and things which can only be regarded as means. The complication arises only if
we take the playful as serious, and that is a fundamental error. [. . .] A good man is a
serious one, not the playful one. He can have a certain playfulness in its proper place.
There is a proper place for being playful unless you have so much money, and even then
you can use your money for better purposes than to just make fun.
Student: [. . .]
LS: But if this is a deliberation proper, does this not lead to a higher end, with a view to
which you have settled this question: whether punishment should only be corrective or

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

267

[also] retribution? How do you go about settling this question? Must you not always refer
to an end?
Student: [. . .]
LS: The well-being of the child, that seems to be rather obvious. Perhaps the good
reputation of the family might come in. Will you go on where we left off in 1113a7?
Reader:
This may be illustrated by the ancient constitutions represented in Homer: the kings used
to proclaim to the people the measures they had chosen to adopt.
As then the object of choice is something within our power which after deliberation we
desire, Choice will be a deliberate desire of things in our power; for we first deliberate,
then select, and finally fix our desire according to the result of our deliberation.
Let this serve as a description in outline of Choice, and of the nature of its objects, and
the fact that it deals with means to ends. (1113a7-14)
LS: Yes, now is this clear, what deliberation and choice mean? Choice is the end of
deliberation. The deliberation may be very defective, and then the choice presumably will
be bad. But without deliberation, no choice.
Student: Previously I believe you spoke of will as being part of choice, and I was
wondering: can a person deliberate what could be an alternative and then choose one,
saying that alternative is the best, and wish to do it but not have the will to do it, and not
have the control over his passions so that he could say that choice and will are not
separate?
LS: I said that there is no Aristotelian word for will—or no Greek word for will. There is
a word “wish” [. . .] and we translate the word [. . .]vi by willing. But it does not have the
precise meaning. What we mean by will is called by Aristotle choice. And the choice is
the core of the action: you choose to help a poor man; that’s an act of the will, [and] for
Aristotle an act of choice. You may do it for improper reasons or you may do it for the
proper reasons, so the right choice would of course be for the proper reasons. And this is
brought about by being brought up properly and the formation of the character being
terminated, so that it is a matter of course to do it properly for the right reasons. Where
does the difficulty come in then?
Student: Could there be a case in which a man has this judgment, in other words, he
could deliberate and reason by his faculties [about] which is the best alternative, but
because, say, his passion overcame his reason—let’s say he is fearful of actually
engaging in the action—he will be held back. He will have this judgment but he will not
actually act.
vi

The ellipses here represent blank spaces in the original transcript.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

268

LS: This would be a problematic thing of which Aristotle spoke, which in the case of
sensual desires is called incontinence: the man who regards smoking as bad and cannot vii
control his desire. So that means, according to Aristotle, that he has not been properly
trained or [has] not properly trained himself so that he does not even desire the things
which are bad. So the good will, if we use this non-Greek, non-Aristotelian expression,
the good will has two ingredients; that Aristotle will make clear in book 6. One is virtue,
the habit, the right habit, and the other is practical wisdom. The two things must come
together. So what you call judgment is an ingredient of good action. How can you act
properly if you don’t judge properly? But that your desire is in agreement with your
judgment, that is not the consequence of your judgment. That’s the consequence of the
training, by others or yourself, of your desires. And if these two things converge, then
you have the good human being. That he chooses, that sees the right thing and naturally
desires it, because it is right: that is the good man according to Aristotle.
Now the point which Aristotle makes here is this, at the end of the passage just read:
desire—or “striving for” is perhaps a better translation [of] orexis—goes towards an end.
This striving for an end precedes the deliberation; otherwise the deliberation would never
start. The choice follows the deliberation. Is this clear? First you strive for something,
then you deliberate, and then you make a choice after the deliberation has come to its
end. But it must be understood that the “striving for” persists during this process;
otherwise, the deliberation would stop because there is no longer any felt need; and that
object of striving, which has been deliberated upon, this is the object of choice. [LS taps
on the table.] Aristotle makes here clear at the end again that this analysis, this definition
of choice is given only in outline, and we can easily see why this is so, for we have seen
that deliberation is common to action and to some of the arts. And it has not been made
sufficiently clear what is the difference between moral and technical deliberation, which
have obviously very different character, the deliberation of physicians about whether they
should make an operation, and the deliberation, say, of parents whether they should send
their children, if they still have such rights left, to this college or to another college. Now
let us continue that. I wish we could complete this today, this section, but we cannot. Let
us see how far we can go. Unless someone wants to raise a point. Let us begin.
Reader:
Wish, on the contrary, as was said above, is for ends.viii But while some hold that what is
wished for is the good, others think it is what appears to be good. Those however who
say that what is wished for is the truly ix good, are faced by the conclusion, that what a
man who chooses his end wrongly wishes for is not really wished for at all; since if it is
to be wished for, it must on their showing be good, whereas in the case assumed it may so
happen that the man wishes for something bad. And those on the other hand who say that
what appears good is wished for, are forced to admit that there is no such thing as that
which is by nature wished for, but that what each man thinks to be good is wished for in
his case; yet different, and it may be opposite, things appear good to different people.

vii

The recording resumes at this point.
In Rackham’s translation: “Wishes, on the contrary, as was said above, are for ends.”
ix
In Rackham’s translation: “really.”
viii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

269

LS: Let us stop here. Now Aristotle raises here the question: what is the object of wish,
i.e., of that which precedes every deliberation? One can say “the truly good,” but then we
would have to say that bad ends are never wished, [which is] contrary to experience.
Hence we should say that the object of wish is “the seeming good,” because whoever
wishes anything wishes it as good for himself. And if the latter is true, then there is
nothing by nature wished, or worthy to be wished at all, because whatever strikes the
fancy of anyone at any time is then as good as anything else. Differently stated, all men
strive for happiness, but there is no determinate meaning of happiness. A gangster finds
his happiness in other things than a nongangster, and various kinds of nongangsters. Let
us read the sequel.
Reader:
If therefore neither of these views is satisfactory, perhaps we should say that what is
wished for in the true and unqualified sense is the good, but that what appears good to
each person is wished for by him; and accordingly that the good man wishes for what is
truly wished for, the bad man for anything as it may happen (just as in the case of our
bodies, a man of sound constitution finds truly healthy food best for his health, but some
other diet may be healthy for one who is delicate; and so with things bitter and sweet, hot,
heavy, etc.). For the good man judges everything correctly; what things truly are, that
they seem to him to be— (1113a15-31)
LS: Let us stop here. Aristotle solves the difficulty. What is by nature to be wished for is
actually willed or wished only by the good man, while the bad one wills or wishes
something which merely seems to be good—and there is an infinite variety of things
which seem to be good. Aristotle exemplifies this by the example of the things healthy,
contributing to health, of the truly healthy things, and the things which are healthy only
relatively. Now what is truly healthy is what is good for the healthy man. The relatively
healthy things are those which are healthy—restorative of health, let us say—for sick
people. They are healthy in a secondary sense. Of course this is only an example;
otherwise one would have to say the bad things chosen by the various bad people are also
good in a secondary sense, which Aristotle is not prepared to say. Yes, now let us go on
here, a31.
Reader:
what things truly are, that they seem to him to be, in each thing x—for special things are
noble and pleasant corresponding to each type of character, and perhaps what chiefly
distinguishes the good man is that he sees the truth in each kind, being himself as it were
the standard and measure of the noble and pleasant. It appears to be pleasure that
misleads the mass of men xi; for it seems to them to be a good, though it is not, so they
choose what is pleasant as good and shun pain as evil. (1113a30-b2)
LS: Ya. So there is a certain relativity, not only of the pleasant things, but even of the
noble, to the hexis, to the habit. If, therefore, the good man is here called the rule and
measure, only to him will the good appear to be good or the truly good. To the other it
x
xi

In Rackham’s translation: “in every department.”
In Rackham’s translation: “mass of mankind.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

270

will not appear [so]. There is an intermediate case, of which we have spoken, that
someone sees the good but follows the worse course because of lack of self-control. Yes?
Student: Could you please clarify for me the difference of Aristotle here with Plato? I
was thinking of the Gorgias, where they say that one desires things, one can desire
wrong, but one can’t will wrong, or something like that. If you desire bad things, it’s not
really will or something.
LS: That is ignorance.
Same Student: Yes. What is exactly—I mean, I assume, this is in part a criticism of that
viewpoint—
LS: Yes, that is correct. Also there is some agreement. The agreement is that in both
cases the good does not come to sight, according to both Socrates–Plato and Aristotle.
But for Aristotle, the simplistic Socratic thesis that virtue is knowledge is wrong, and
therefore the twofold—the analysis of the good actions into the two in a way independent
ingredients: sense or reasonableness and habit. The habit is acquired by habituation:
being sensible is gained by life experience. These are two different factors, and Socrates
did not make that distinction. The view that virtue is knowledge, Socrates’s assertion:
what that means is a very long question. Whether he meant it as literally as it seems and
as Aristotle frequently takes it is an open question. Surely this other ingredient does not
come out, and Plato does make a distinction between vulgar virtue and genuine virtue.
Genuine virtue would be knowledge, and vulgar virtue would be based on habituation
and opinion. Toward the end of the Republic, about 612, there is this remark that the
nonphilosophic people chose their way of life prior to this life, and these are people
whose virtue is acquired only by habit. For Aristotle, there is no moral virtue which is not
due to habituation. This is a very crude statement. If you read, for example, the first book
of Plato’s Laws, you would see that Plato was aware of the importance of habituation for
becoming virtuous. But somehow Plato preferred to discuss, especially in these so-called
earlier dialogues, the question as if virtue could be reduced to knowledge, which, if taken
literally, is surely a wrong assertion.
Student: Does Aristotle make provision for a type of virtue superior to that of
habituation in any way?
LS: Well, this is not genuine virtue. There are a few discussions of this in Aristotle’s
Ethics. One is when he speaks of courage, of the first of the virtues. He distinguishes five
pseudo-forms of courage that would be vulgar courage in contradistinction to true
courage. And then the discussion of continence in book 7 is in a way also the discussion
of a lower kind of virtue, continence being lower than temperance, the temperate man not
having bad desires, and the continent man having bad desires but controlling them.
Same Student: Does that indicate then that in a certain sense the spoudaios is actually
not, let’s say, the highest type of man? If we talk about the types of chracters, Aristotle
does in a certain sense—

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

271

LS: How can you draw this conclusion from what I have said?
Same Student: Well, insofar as mere habituation doesn’t suffice—
LS: This “mere” is brought in by you.
Same Student: Well, I’m reading into what you’re saying. If there can be types of
habituation, some types of which are vulgar, and other types which aren’t vulgar,
habituation itself can’t be the same—
LS: The question is whether these pseudo-forms are all due to habituation. For example,
there can be something like a natural boldness, a daredevil posturing which is not due to
habituation but the fellow is born with that. But you are of course right nevertheless,
because, as I have deplored before, we have to think of the end of the Ethics, where the
wise man, the contemplative man, appears. And in the light of him, moral virtue, merely
moral virtue becomes debunked in a way. You know? To that extent you are right, but
this subject has not yet come up in the Aristotelian text. Mr Wedegreen?xii
Student: I was talking about the last time you said that what’s good for me is a purely
practical question for Aristotle.
LS: That doesn’t mean that it doesn’t have certain presuppositions of a theoretical kind.
Same Student: But I was thinking, for instance, if in the light of what you’ve just said
about the end which comes to light—it appears, for instance, if someone would ask
themselves, say, “What kind of a soul I have?” And Aristotle also says that things are
good in themselves, and we pray that they’re good for us—
LS: These are outer things. These are external goods. For example, most men like to have
all kinds of conveniences, like houses without cockroaches and other things of this kind.
These are the things by nature good, and Aristotle says they are good only for the good,
because others will only be corrupted by them.
Same Student: . . . good man . . . only the philosopher . . .
LS: No, you are too quick. I mean, you forget certain intermediate stages. Aristotle
remains more loyal to the phenomena. You must always think of this question: there must
be principles accessible to the large majority of men if there is to be a decent civil life.
And therefore these principles must not be in need of a complicated theoretical deduction,
although the philosopher may be interested in this question of what their theoretical
foundations are.
Same Student: For instance, if one thinks of Locke’s regime or of our regime, it’s not
transparently clear that there have to be these grand principles of ethics accessible to . . .
xii

The tape was changed at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

272

LS: According to Locke, in the passage which I read to this class, the legislator has
nothing whatever to do with virtue and vice. That is the price you pay for that: you are
very pragmatic; you lay your foundation very low, but solid. That seems to be very
practical, and yet then there is no place for taking care of the moral level of the
community. And that is a defect of Locke’s doctrine.
Same Student: Maybe, but I was just thinking that, on the other hand, I’d say we have
some pretty good stuff coming out of this low, basement-level principle.
LS: Yes, sure, but the question is: is this due to the theory or is this due to a heritage
antedating the theory?
Same Student: I don’t know.
LS: One would have to investigate that. But, I mean, as a thesis, to say that virtue and
vice are utterly irrelevant to the political society and the only thing is to protect property
and freedom—but freedom is this awkward thing. It is freedom for evil as well as for
good. And virtue means exactly to have lost that freedom through a habit, namely, the
habit of acting well habitually. Yes?
Student: If what you say is true, then from Aristotle’s point of view, to have a decent
regime one must have principles which are open to a large majority and not need detailed,
theoretical elaboration. But then it would seem that a man like Plato, for example—it
would seem that, say, that this book, and in fact the Politics also, can in a way appear as
an apology for philosophy, or particularly the philosophy of Plato, and in a nonapologetic
form, of course. But, in other words, if a man like Plato were to write a treatise, he would
write this treatise.
LS: In a way, yes. The word “apology” is not good, as you admitted. But one can say that
what the Platonic discussions presuppose has been elaborated in Aristotle’s Ethics, by
which I mean this: when you have a discussion of courage, for example, in Plato’s
Laches, you learn something about courage, without any question. But you do not get a
full picture of the phenomenon of courage as ordinarily understood; that you get only
with Aristotle, because Plato is much too eager to transcend that ordinary understanding
in the direction of the highest possible understanding. And, for example, for Aristotle the
fact that courage is located or resides in the battlefield belongs to the definition of
courage. But that courage2 [during] an operation, that is, prior to the invention of medical
help in this respect, or toward any other dangers is not fundamentally different from the
courage shown in the battlefield. Say the . . . and then he finds one or two more steps,
then he comes to the point where courage is identical with virtue, and the specific
difference of courage is lost.
Now I think one can see both the advantages and disadvantages of the the two
philosophers. On the one hand, we really should know what we primarily understand by
courage—primary meaning in a political context—and why this is so. This we should

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

273

make clear to ourselves. One can perhaps say what Aristotle does is less acceptable to 3
[those who are] now called the intellectuals than what Plato does; I mean that the truly
political bias of Aristotle is not the same as the bias of the intellectual, and the intellectual
would be more willing to go with Plato. But on the other hand, the intellectual has got a
point: that the perspective of the practical man is more limited, and some people, at any
rate, must transcend it.
Student: In speaking of the differences between Plato and Aristotle, you used the term
advantages of the various two. I wonder, is that a proper or a valuable way of attempting
to understand them, in terms of their advantages toward—?
LS: Well, say virtues and vices.
Same Student: No, but advantages for what, perhaps is a better—
LS: There are advantages for theory, for understanding, and there are advantages for
practical purposes, such as the formation of the character of a citizen body. There is no a
priori certainty that these two things are identical.
Same Student: No. Well, I guess what I’m asking is, what is the function of advantages
for—I mean, in what sense is it proper to speak of a philosophy in terms of its advantages
rather instead of its correct understanding of things?
LS: But is not philosophy also frequently thought4—and not only now, but at all times—
to be of help to men?
Same Student: Yes, perhaps so. But does one judge it primarily in terms of its
advantages to men or in terms of its correct understanding of things?
LS: But why should one rush such a decision? It is perfectly sufficient for our present
purposes if we see that these are two different considerations. I think it is very important
to see that they are different considerations: that it is not a foregone conclusion that the
quest for truth for its own sake is simply in harmony with the needs of man as a social,
political being.
Same Student: No, that wasn’t—
LS: Yes, but this is a question which one must raise. And therefore one must balance the
two considerations, and therefore one may speak of advantages and disadvantages from
these two different points of view. This is at least what I had in mind. Now let us go on
here.
Reader:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

274

If then whereas we wish for our end, the means to our end are matters of deliberation and
choice, it follows that actions dealing xiii with these means are done by choice, and
voluntary. But the activities in which the virtues are exercised deal with means. Therefore
virtue also depends on ourselves. And so also does vice. For where we are free to act we
are also free to refrain from acting, and where we are able to say No we are also able to
say Yes; if therefore we are responsible for doing a thing when to do it is right, we are
also responsible for not doing it when not to do it is wrong, and if we are responsible for
rightly not doing a thing, we are also responsible for wrongly doing it. But if it is in our
power to do and to refrain from doing right and wrong, and if, as we saw, being good or
bad is doing right or wrong, it consequently depends on us whether we are virtuous or
vicious. (1113b3-14)
LS: Ya. So here he draws the conclusion from the fact that deliberation and choice has to
do with the means to the end. The end is natural. It does not depend on us; it is imposed
on us by nature. But the means to the end have to be discovered by us and must be in our
power, otherwise we could not achieve the end. Hence, since virtue and vice are at home
in the sphere of what leads to the end, they are in our power, and we are responsible for
being either virtuous or vicious, or something in-between, if that exists. The object of
wish, “the wished,” does not depend on us. That is because it is imposed on us by nature,
as we have seen before in what we read earlier. Yes, Mr. Smith?
Student: We wish for both happiness and, say, I think, wishing is applied to the best
regime: the best regime is that regime which we would wish for. But yet we have
examples of happy men, but we have no examples of—
LS: Yes, but there is a question, as we have seen. Priam or Job: they are responsible for
their being good men. They are not responsible for their being unhappy or miserable men,
because that does not depend on them, but because virtue has this peculiar character
which it has according to Aristotle, even in their misery they are never contemptible
because their virtue will show in their misery and towards their misery. Yes?
Reader:
To say that
None are willingly wicked nor unwillingly blessed xiv
seems to be half false, though half true: it is true that no one is unwilling to be blessed,
but not true that wickedness is unspontaneous xv—
LS: This reminds somewhat of the Socratic saying, but it is the saying of a poet, and one
doesn’t know which poet: “No one is voluntarily bad nor involuntarily happy.” And
Aristotle, says, “Surely the latter part is true, all men desire by nature to be happy. But
xiii

There is a break in the tape while the student is reading. The missing portion of the passage has
been supplied from the text.
xiv
In Rackham’s translation: “None would be vile, and none would not be blest.”
xv
In Rackham’s translation: “involuntary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

275

the first half is wrong; men are responsible for their wickedness.” Hence their wickedness
is voluntary. Yes?
Reader:
or else we must contradict what we just now asserted, and say that man is not the
originator and begetter of his actions as he is of his children. But if it is manifest that a
man is the author of his own actions, and if we are unable to trace our conduct back to
any other origins than those within ourselves, then actions of which the origins are within
us, themselves depend upon us, and are spontaneous.xvi
This conclusion seems to be attested both by men’s behaviour in private life and by the
practice of lawgivers; for they punish and exact redress from those who do evil (except
when it is done under compulsion, or through ignorance for which the agent himself is
not responsible), and honour those who do noble deeds, in order to encourage the one sort
and to repress the other; but nobody tries to encourage us to do things that do not depend
upon ourselves and are not voluntary, since it is no good our being persuaded not to feel
heat or pain or hunger or the like, because we shall feel them all the same. (1113b14-30)
LS: So here Aristotle gives a proof of a kind for his assertion that we are responsible for
our goodness or badness, namely, what is presupposed in all legislation: in punishment
and also in rewards. This is a most obvious argument; whether it is sufficiently good is
another matter. It was questioned in antiquity already, but in modern times perhaps with
greater influence by Hobbes. I read to you a few passages from Hobbes’s Of Liberty and
Necessity. Bishop Bramhallxvii attacked Hobbes for his view on freedom, and he speaks of
the inconvenience of the view that man’s actions are predetermined. The first
inconvenience, he says, is this: that the laws which prohibit any action will be unjust,
especially since the prohibition is followed by punishment, and the man is not
responsible. This argument I don’t have to belabor because it is underlying quite a bit of
present-day practice, as you know. Now Hobbes denies that. Hobbes is in favor of
punishment and against freedom of will.
“Suppose the law, on pain of death, prohibit stealing, and there be a man who by the
strength of temptation is necessitated to steal and is thereupon put to death; does not this
punishment deter others? Is it not a cause that others steal not? Does it not frame and
make their wills to justice? [So in other words, Hobbes’s contention: the practice of
punishment is perfectly compatible with the practice of the laws.—LS] Men are justly
killed, not for that their actions are not necessitated, but because they are noxious, and
they are spared and preserved whose actions are not noxious.”xviii
In other words, one does not need the doctrine of the freedom of the will in order to
justify the practice of punishment, the practice of punishment being itself a chain in the
causal nexus. By punishment or by honoring, men are made good, and so on.5 [Hobbes
xvi

In Rackham’s translation: “voluntary.”
John Bramhall (1594-1663), Archbishop of Armagh.
xviii
Thomas Hobbes, Of Liberty and Necessity, section 14. See Hobbes and Bramhall on Liberty
and Necessity, ed. Vere Chappell (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 24-25.
xvii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

276

would even go so far as to regard] his own doctrine as a part of the causal nexus. Given
the state of discussion, and given the fact that Hobbes had this kind of training and this
kind of nature, he couldn’t help developing his doctrine and eventually writing the
Leviathan. And then the Leviathan could influence British government, and Hobbes had
at least the hope that it would become the textbook in Oxford and Cambridge, and then
the gentlemen, who would later be justices of the peace, would be trained Hobbeans and
would in this capacity mete out a punishment which is in Hobbes’s view perfectly just,
although it denies the kind of responsibility which according to Aristotle man has. Now
let us read a little bit later, b30.
Reader:
Indeed, the fact that an offence was committed in ignorance is itself made a ground for
punishment, in cases where the offender is held to be responsible for his ignorance; for
example,xix the penalty is doubled if the offender was drunk, because the origin of the
offence was in the man himself, as he might have avoided getting drunk, which was the
cause of his not knowing what he was doing. Also men are punished for offences
committed through ignorance of some provision of the law which they ought to have
known, and might have known without difficulty; and so in other cases where ignorance
is held to be due to negligence, on the ground that the offender need not have been
ignorant, as he could have taken the trouble to ascertain the facts.
It may be objected that perhaps he is not the sort of man to take the trouble. Well, but
men are themselves responsible for having become careless through living carelessly, as
they are for being unjust or profligate if they do wrong or pass their time in drinking and
dissipation. They acquire a particular quality by constantly acting in a particular way.
This is shown by the way in which men train themselves for some contest or pursuit: they
practise continually. Therefore only an utterly senseless person can fail to know that our
characters are the result of our conduct— (1113b30-1114a10)
LS: So in other words, men are responsible for acts committed while they are drunk, for
they are responsible for their being drunk. They are also responsible for their ignorance if
this ignorance could be avoided. Surely the ignorance of the law is not an excuse. The
ignorance of fact may be an excuse if in the circumstances the ignorance was for all
practical purposes inevitable. Aristotle does not here even allude to the possibility that
there might be men who are by nature incapable of taking these efforts. And the question
“Who is not sensitive to these things? Can there not be by nature such a man?” is not
taken up.
Thomas Aquinas explains the last sentence which we have read in the following manner.
If someone wishes to take a walk in the summer’s heat, knowing that he would perspire,
then he wished to perspire; i.e., knowing that, this is a necessary consequence: accepting
it, he wishes to perspire—although the two wishes have a somewhat different character,
the wish to take the walk, and the wish to perspire, but the voluntariness is common to
both.xx This is a noncriminal and a harmless action, but it helps a bit to understand how
xix
xx

In Rackham’s translation: “for instance.”
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §512.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 15

277

far they extend human responsibility. Is there any point you would like to raise? We have
a few more minutes. Yes?
Student: Just a minor one. I can’t see how the desire to take a walk can be translated into
a desire to perspire. It may be that one wants to take a walk in spite of the fact that one
knows one will perspire, but that is a far cry from “I want to take a walk because I want
to perspire”—
LS: But you foresaw it. You foresaw that you would perspire, and you said, I am going—
Same Student: I’ll put up with it, but that doesn’t mean—
LS: But it is voluntary. That doesn’t mean that you desired it. Look at the action of the
men who throw their merchandise or their luggage into the ocean because it’s the only
way to save themselves. Aristotle also says they do it voluntarily in the circumstances.
Same Student: I guess, but I—
LS: Because they are confronted with the choice: should they perish together with their
luggage or should they survive while their luggage only perishes? And they made the
choice, a wise choice in the circumstances. Whether this was a wise choice depends on
how [much] good perspiration would do to you [laughter], which Thomas doesn’t
explain.
1

Deleted “that.”
Deleted “on.”
3
Deleted “what is.”
4
Deleted “to be.”
5
Changed from “even he goes so far—Hobbes regarded his.”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

278

Session 16: April 3, 1968
Leo Strauss: It’s all right; there is only one little point. You say, “No one deliberates
about eternal things such as the material universe.” Why did you add “material”?i
Student: I thought that was the example that Aristotle used himself—
LS: Aristotle speaks of the cosmos, which you translate by the universe or the world. But
there is no need for adding “material,” because that would imply there is also a spiritual
universe. But the cosmos, as Aristotle understands it, includes everything. That’s all. Will
you pass it on? Good.
And then I have a question for Mr. Fawcet. Here you are. Yes, well, you can read your
handwriting better than I can. It is a very legible handwriting. So read it to the class, and
we will discuss it.
Student: Well, it’s this business of going for a walk and sweating again. I didn’t know
whether it was . . . [Laughter] Well, at any rate.
LS: But you proposed a different interpretation than Aristotle did.
Same Student: Well, actually your interpretation of what I thought Aristotle said was a
little different from what I thought my interpretation is. “Clearly if a man takes a walk on
a summer day, he will perspire, and he is aware that he will perspire. He accepts the fact
of his perspiring as a result of his taking a walk, but accepting is not a synonym for
wishing. Likewise, an intelligent man who is lazy and by consequence of his laziness
doesn’t realize his intellectual potential is not a man who wishes not to realize his
intellectual potential but is a man who doesn’t wish sufficiently to realize that potential,
and so accepts consequences which he doesn’t particularly like, but doesn’t dislike
sufficiently to take remedial action. Perhaps my question amounts to nothing more than a
semantic quibble, but would you please clarify between wishing and accepting,
understanding that responsibility for acting is present in either case?”
LS: Yes, that is the point. When you make this distinction, you seem to blur the fact that
he is responsible. Then you say that he accepts it only, he doesn’t wish it: his
responsibility does not come out as clearly as it does when it is interpreted along
Aristotle’s and Thomas Aquinas’s lines. Of course he does not wish to perspire. I mean,
he does not wish that primarily and per se, but nevertheless [a] wish for that is included
in what he actually and primarily wishes, therefore. And the same applies also to the case
you proposed: the man who from laziness does not actualize his potentialities. It’s not
merely semantics but a difference of opinion. And I think one has to see whether you are
right or Aristotle, by which I do not mean that we should set you up as an authority
against Aristotle, but you may be right nevertheless, in spite of the fact that Aristotle is
right in so many other things. Good.
i

Strauss begins the session by responding to students’ papers and questions submitted in writing.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

279

Now let us turn to our very summary reading of sections from book 4. I remind you again
of the whole context. Aristotle suggests by his own writing that one cannot understand
political things as political things if one is not able to evaluate them properly. If you
know everything about socialized medicine except whether it is good or bad, you know
nothing about socialized medicine, and the same is also true of other subjects. Now in
order to evaluate them properly, one must have a standard, a nonarbitrary standard, and
that means in Aristotle’s language a natural standard. The natural standard is determined
by the purpose of political society. The purpose of the political society, as he says not
here but in the Politics, is the good life: not mere life, or satisfaction, or adjustment, or
law and order.ii The good life is the life of human excellence, of virtue; and therefore, in
order to judge intelligently of political matters, we must have a full articulation of this
standard. What is virtue, and what are the particular virtues? If we have this goal before
us with the greatest possible clarity, we are better judges of political things than without
it. Now this presentation of all the virtues is given by Aristotle in books 3 to 5. This
presentation does not go without saying. If we consider the various virtues praised or
blamed, say, in Aristotle’s time, or for that matter in any later time, we see that Aristotle
makes a selection. And this is still more emphasized by the fact that there is an order, an
arrangement according to which some of the virtues are lower in rank than others. And if
one considers that, both the selection and the arrangement, one can discern what one may
call the spirit of Aristotle by simply saying which virtues does he disconsider and what
place does he assign to each of the virtues he mentions.
Now we have seen that he begins his discussion with courage, and then he speaks of
moderation. Both virtues have to do with affections which we share with the brutes. That
means they are lower in this respect. Then he turns to liberality, the one virtue regarding
expense, i.e., money, something which is by this very fact human, because brutes don’t
have money. I mean, although it is possible to make a will in favor of one’s favorite cat,
yet this doesn’t work out as if you had left it to a human being. Now I think we should
consider a few more passages regarding the virtues. We turn perhaps to 1121a8.
Reader:
The prodigal on the other hand errs in his feelings with regard to money as well as
in his actions; he feels neither pleasure nor pain on the right occasions nor in the
right manner. This will become clearer as we proceed.
We have said then that Prodigality and Meanness are modes of excess and of
deficiency, and this in two things, giving and getting—giving being taken to
include spending. Prodigality exceeds in giving [without getting],iii and is
deficient in getting; Meanness falls short in giving and goes to excess in getting,
only not on the great scale. Now the two forms of Prodigality are very seldom
found united in the same person, because it is not easy to give to everyone without
receiving from anyone: the giver’s means are soon exhausted, if he is a private
citizen, and only such persons are considered prodigal. In fact, a man who is
ii
iii

See Aristotle, Politics 1252b27-30.
Brackets are Rackham’s.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

280

prodigal in both ways may be thought considerably superior to the mean man; for
he is easily cured by age or by poverty, and is able to be brought to the due mean,
because he possesses the essentials of the liberal character—he gives, and he
refrains from taking, though he does neither in the proper way or rightly. Correct
this by training, or otherwise reform him, and he will be liberal, for he will now
give his money to the right objects, while he will not get it from the wrong
sources. This is why he is felt to be not really bad in character; for to exceed in
giving without getting is foolish rather than evil or ignoble. The prodigal of this
type therefore seems to be much superior to the mean man, both for the reasons
stated, and because the former benefits many people, but the latter benefits
nobody, not even himself.
LS: Let us stop here. So the prodigal is to be preferred to the stingy one. I think we can
still understand this despite the fact that we are subject to the puritan ethics, as it has been
called, as the soul of the capitalist society. iv Prodigality is not base, strictly speaking, but
rather foolish. The prodigals are thought to help many others, this is at least the
impression, and sometimes he may really give something to a man who deserves being
helped, although it is a bit accidental in his case. But the stingy ones do not help anyone,
not even themselves. This is an important point here, which Aristotle makes a bit later, in
1121b12 to 16, which we might read. “The stinginess or illiberality is incurable.” No, a
bit later.
Reader:
Meanness on the contrary is incurable; for we see that it can be caused by old age or any
form of weakness. Also it is more ingrained in man’s nature than Prodigality; the mass of
menv are avaricious rather than open-handed.” (1121a8-16)
LS: Yes, let us stop here. So in other words, stinginess and greediness are in a way more
liberal than liberality or prodigality. Thomas Aquinas, in his commentary on the passage,
speaks here of a natural inclination in this respect.vi Aristotle had made an earlier remark
in 1119a20 to 33 about cowardice: that cowardice is somehow more natural than overboldness. Fear of death is an important ingredient of our make-up; similarly, to stick to
what is his own and to protect it [is something] for which we have a natural inclination,
and this has to be considered in the overall judgments.
Somewhat later on, in b31 following, he speaks of tyrants, a subject which we discussed
briefly last time in this connection—[b]31, do we have that?
Reader:
The other sort of people are those who exceed in respect of getting, taking from every
source and all they can; such are those who follow degrading trades, brothel-keepers and
all people of that sort, and petty usurers who lend money in small sums at a high rate of
interest; all these take from wrong sources, and more than their due. The common
iv

See Max Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1904-1905).
In Rackham’s translation: “mankind.”
vi
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §698.
v

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

281

characteristic of all these seems to be sordid greed, since they all endure reproach for
gain, and for a small gain. Those who make improper gains from improper sources on a
great scale, for instance princes who sack cities and rob temples—
LS: Here he says “tyrants.” In other words, hevii follows Machiavelli, who avoids the
word “tyrant” when he speaks to tyrants, because they would not be flattered. They
would want to be called “princes.” We should not imitate Machiavelli, in this and in other
respects.
Reader:
tyrants who sack cities and rob temples are not termed mean, but rather wicked or
impious or unjust. (1121b31-1122a7)
LS: Yes, we can leave it, I think. In other words, there are distinctions, very important
distinctions, even within hell. To be mean is something very low. But the tyrant is much
meaner than that, because what he does the ordinary mean man would not do—the things
which have been mentioned here. So meanness then is not the worst thing, the worst vice
which a man can have. The extreme of injustice goes much further.
Now another point which we might mention here is this (but was already stated before):
that expense must correspond to the greatness of the beings with a view to which the
expenses are made. And he gives two examples of such beings: first, gods and heroes;
and second, the polis, for the expense for temples and for the adornment of the city: they
are the proper objects of liberality. And this implies, as Aristotle makes clear, that a poor
or an obscure man cannot be liberal in the full sense of the word, because there is a
certain lack of propriety if an obscure man makes himself the benefactor of the city by
such means, say, by the building of temples or any other thing of this kind.
So all this Aristotle takes in his stride, that there are certain virtues which, at least in their
highest form, are inaccessible to poor people. That is so; it cannot be helped. And
Aristotle’s comfort would be that there is something much higher than moral virtue,
namely, intellectual perfection, which is accessible even to poor people. See Socrates.
Now let us read 1123a28.
Reader:
The paltry man on the other hand will err on the side of deficiency in everything; even
when he is spending a great deal, he will spoil the effect for a trifle, and by hesitating at
every stage and considering how he can spend least, and even so grudging what he
spends and always thinking he is doing things on a greater scale than is necessary. These
dispositions then are vices, but they do not bring serious discredit, since they are not
injurious to others, nor are they excessively unseemly. (1123a27-33)
LS: We have raised the question before as to the end which the virtues serve. Now that
the virtuous actions are an end in themselves, we know. But nevertheless, they have ends.
And here we see, for example, if a certain vice does damage to one’s neighbor, this is a
vii

That is, Rackham.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

282

more serious vice than if it does not do such damage. So this consideration of the ends of
virtue you must never forget. Aristotle does not speak of it thematically, but he always
has it in mind, as can be seen. The two overall ends which Aristotle considers, we can say
on the basis of this passage, are whether this habit is useful to others—and the others
means, in the highest case, the city, the community—and whether it is becoming to the
doer. Something may be unbecoming to the doer and yet not harm others, and vice versa.
Now we come to one of the most important sections of the Ethics: the discussion of
magnanimity. The context is this. Aristotle has spoken first of courage and moderation,
and then he has gone over to the two virtues connected with wealth, which deals with a
higher—liberality and megaloprepeia. How do they translate that?
Student: “Magnificence.”
LS: “Munificence,” yes. So munificence has to do with great expenses, and liberality has
to with relatively small expenses. Now he turns to the virtues which have to do with
honor and honors. There is one regarding high honors and one regarding not-high honors.
The virtue regarding high honors is magnanimity. And this is one of the central passages
of the Ethics, as you will see from a few passages which we may read. Now let us read
the beginning first.
Reader: Do you want me to translate this “magnanimity” or “greatness of soul”?
LS: Both are equally good. I mean, one is Latin the other is Saxon. Magnanimity—you
know, magnitudo animi and greatness-of-the-soul is the same thing. That depends, I
think, on accident, on habit or . . . “Greatness-of-soul” sounds better than “magnanimity,”
I admit that. Yes?
Reader:
Greatness of Soul, as the word itself implies, seems to be related to great objects; let us
first ascertain what sort of objects these are. It will make no difference whether we
examine the habit itself or the person that displays the habit. viii (1123a34-b1)
LS: “The habit itself,” meaning magnanimity. The one who acts according to the habit:
that is the magnanimous man. Does this make sense? This does not make such a
difference. Yes? Good.
Reader:
Now a person is thought to be great-souled if he claims much and deserves much;
he who claims much without deserving it is foolish, but no one of moral nobilityix
is foolish or senseless. The great-souled man is then as we have described. He
who deserves little and claims little is modest,x but not great-souled, since to be

viii

In Rackham’s translation: “quality itself or the person that displays the quality.”
In Rackham’s translation: “excellence.”
x
In Rackham’s translation: “modest or temperate.”
ix

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

283

great-souled involves greatness just as beauty xi involves size: small people may be
neat and well-made, but not beautiful.xii He that claims much but does not deserve
much is vain; though not everybody who claims more than he deserves is vain. He
that claims less than he deserves is small-souled, whether his deserts be great or
only moderate, or even though he deserves little, if he claims still less. The most
small-souled of all would seem to be the man who claims less than he deserves
when his deserts are great; for what would he have done had he not deserved so
much?
Though therefore in regard to the greatness of his claim the great-souled man is an
extreme, by reason of its correctnessxiii he stands at the mean point, for he claims
what he deserves— (1123b1-15)
LS: Yes. That is a point which we have to emphasize. There is a man who is not worthy
of high honors, and he knows it and he acts accordingly. This is not a vicious man. In
Greek, he is sōphrōn, which we usually translate by “moderate,” but “modest” makes
good sense here. That is, modesty is a virtue, but it is a lower virtue than magnanimity
itself: that a man who deserves great honor judges rightly about his subject, and acts
accordingly by claiming these high honors. Do you see any other point we should take up
in this connection? So there are virtues to which even most ordinarily virtuous men have
no access. That’s important.
Mr. Shulsky: He says that those who claim a lot, not being worthy of it, are vain, but that
there are some who claim more than they [deserve], but that not everybody is vain who
claims more than he deserves. In other words, there are some people who claim more but
still would not be considered vain. And I was wondering whether they would sort of be
almost great-souled, and that the great-souled man might even put a greater claim on it?
LS: Yes. An example would be helpful. Does one occur to you?
Mr. Shulsky: For instance, considering Alexander’s claim to be a god, his desire to be a
god. Now that might be considered from one point of view an obvious case of putting in a
greater claim than he is worth, because he’s obviously not a god. But on the other hand, it
doesn’t—this wouldn’t be, might not necessarily—
LS: Yes, that is possible. And also considering his youth and his early death, and so it
would—one wouldn’t call him vain. Aristotle, at least, would not call him vain. Yes. That
makes sense. But this is another complication which arises, because we are here near a
peak of the whole Ethics, and therefore a certain ambiguity cannot be avoided. We might
perhaps—yes?
Student: Aristotle would or would not call him vain?

xi

In Rackham’s translation: “handsomeness.”
In Rackham’s translation: “handsome.”
xiii
In Rackham’s translation: “rightness.”
xii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

284

LS: He would not call him vain. Where we left off, Mr. Pangle: “If he regards himself as
worthy of great things, while being worthy.” Yes?
Reader:
If then the great-souled man claims and is worthy of great things and most of all
the greatest things, Greatness of Soul must be concerned with some one object
especially. ‘Worthy’ is a term of relation: it denotes having a claim to goods
external to oneself. Now the greatest external good we should assume to be the
thing which we offer as a tribute to the gods, and which is most coveted by men
of high station, and is the prize awarded for the noblest deeds; and such a thing is
honour, for honour is clearly the greatest of external goods. Therefore the greatsouled man is he who has the right disposition in relation to honours and
disgraces. And even without argument it is evident that honour is the object with
which the great-souled men are concerned, since it is honour above all else which
great men claim and deserve.
LS: Now we can say that whereas the munificent man is the only one who honors the
gods properly, because the gifts which he makes and the temples which he builds are
appropriate to the gods, the magnanimous man behaves like the gods. To that extent the
example given by Mr. Shulsky was very adequate. Yes. Now a little bit later, in 33. And
if we look at the phenomena in every respect, it would appear that the magnanimous man
would be altogether ridiculous if he were not good, virtuous.
Reader:
Moreover, if he were bad, he would not be worthy of honour, since honour is the prize of
virtue, and the tribute that we pay to the good. Greatness of Soul seems therefore to be as
it were a crowning ornament of the virtues: it enhances their greatness, and it cannot exist
without them. (1123b15-1124a3)
LS: Yes. Now this is a unique statement. Aristotle does not say this of any of the other
virtues, only of magnanimity. Magnanimity is the peak of the virtues. It presupposes all
other virtues and gives them a splendor which, without it, they would not have. And as he
says in the sequel, the virtue [of the magnanimous man] is altogether perfect. Yes.
Now I would like to mention, there is another peak in the Ethics apart from the section on
magnanimity. That is the section on justice at the beginning of the fifth book. And one
can say that the Aristotelian moral universe has two peaks: one, magnanimity; and the
other, justice. And magnanimity is a peak of morality (goodness) from the point of view
of the individual himself, the highest stature, whereas justice is the peak from the point of
view of man’s relation to other human beings. And Aristotle leaves it at this distinction,
at this tension, without trying to make this more simple, less questionable. Such is life.
There are these two points of view from which we can and must look at human beings.
There are these two poles. There is no conflict between them, but there is a different
orientation in both cases. Now let us look at a few examples. 1124b9.
Reader:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

285

He is fond of conferring benefits, but ashamed to receive them, because the
former is a mark of superiority and the latter of inferiority. He returns a service
done to him with interest, since this will put the original benefactor into his debt
in turn, and make him the party benefited. The great-souled are thought to have a
good memory for any benefit they have conferred, but a bad memory for those
which they have received (since the recipient of a benefit is the inferior of his
benefactor, whereas they desire to be superior); and they are said to enjoyxiv being
reminded of the former but to dislike being reminded of the latter: this is why the
poet makes Thetis not specify her services to Zeus; nor did the Spartans treating
with the Athenians recall the occasions when Sparta had aided Athens, but those
on which Athens had aided Sparta.
LS: That’s very different from our feelings today, but here we are. Go on.
Reader:
It is also characteristic of the great-souled man never to ask help from others, or
only with reluctance, but to render aid willingly; and to be haughty towards men
of position and fortune, but courteous toward those of moderate station, because it
is difficult and distinguished to be superior to the great, but easy to outdo the
lowly, and to adopt the high manner with the former is not ill-bred, but it is vulgar
to lord it over humble people: it is like putting forth one’s strength against the
weak. He will not compete for the common objects of ambition, or go where other
people take the first place; and he will be idle and slow to act, except when
pursuing some high honour or achievement; and will not engage in many
undertakings, but only in such as are important and distinguished. He must be
open both in love and in hate, since concealment shows timidity; and care more
for the truth than for what people will think; and speak and act openly, since as he
despises other men he is outspoken and frank, except when speaking with ironical
self-depreciation, as he does to the many. xv He will be incapable of living at the
will of another, exceptxvi a friend, since to do so is slavish, and hence flatterers are
always servile, and humble people flatterers. (1124b9-1125a2)
LS: Yes. I think that is intelligible and doesn’t require much of a comment, except to
emphasize that this runs counter to our feelings in certain points. Our feelings having
been molded by the biblical tradition, and it is quite interesting to see how Thomas
Aquinas discusses these matters and tries to bring them into harmony with biblical
morality. In the present time you find sometimes interpreters who say that Aristotle is not
simply an admirer of the magnanimous man, that there is quite a bit of irony in that. I
think that is not true. In a way, the whole Ethics, one can say, is ironical because it does
not look at the moral phenomena from the highest point of view—the bulk of the Ethics,
at least. One has to take that as it is.

xiv

In Rackham’s translation: “and enjoy.”
In Rackham’s translation: “to common people.”
xvi
In Rackham’s translation: “unless.”
xv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

286

Now irony, this word which you all have heard so often, which is today so common,
occurs rarely in Aristotle. But here there is one of the references, the first reference to it.
The magnanimous man is the frank man, because of his great opinion of himself, and he
is in no sense a coward, and not a moral coward in particular. But there are certain
relations in which he is ironical. “Ironical” means dissembling. He dissembles his
superiority; that is the meaning of irony. He dissembles his superiority when talking to
inferior people—the many, as Aristotle says. That is because it would be too cheap a
triumph to be recognized as superior to people who are manifestly his inferiors. Yes. And
a little bit further on, in 1125a5 to 9, there he doesn’t talk about human beings. Yes?
Mr. Zinman: I can understand why—your earlier comment certainly makes sense that,
for example, it would seem that the great-souled man is a peak, and because he is a peak,
he does not really use all the virtues, for example, modesty. He does not have the virtue
of modesty.
LS: Yes, sure, because it is a lesser virtue.
Mr. Zinman: But what about the problem of irony later being treated as a vice?
LS: Yes, but that is another sign of the complexity. Irony as such, that is a lack of
veracity, and that is a vice. But in certain circumstances, it is not a vice. Well, one can
make the transition as follows, Mr. Zinman. Even in this passage, when he speaks of the
irony later on thematically, he makes it clear that while it is a vice, it is a graceful vice,
more graceful, at any rate, than its opposite. The boaster, that is the other faulty extreme.
There is the truthful man, who doesn’t say more about himself than is the case; and then
there is a boaster; and on the other pole, there is the ironical man. Now the boaster is very
obnoxious, and compared with him the ironical man is a graceful man, although it is not
the perfectly right thing, because he understates his worth. Well, if he understates his
worth in order to flatter the powerful people, then he is despicable. But if he does it in
order not hurt other people’s feelings, that would be a different case. A man who is
walking around and trying to impress and oppress his fellows by showing off his abilities
is an obnoxious man; and therefore the man who conceals his superiority in order not to
hurt other people’s feelings, that’s in the worst case a graceful vice. But the transition
from a graceful vice to an ingredient of virtue is relatively easy. Think of a man of very
high superiority, as the magnanimous man doubtless is, confronted with people who are
manifestly his inferiors. And then this would be proper in these circumstances. One must
always consider the circumstances, Mr. Zinman, as you have learned from other teachers,
like Edmund Burke. And Aristotle was perhaps the first to state this lesson so powerfully,
and we should also give him the benefit of the doubt. Now let us go on: “He will not be a
gossip.” In Greek, the word is anthrōpologos, a man who talks about human beings. Yes?
Reader:
He is no gossip, for he will not talk either about himself or about another, as he neither
wants to receive compliments nor to hear other people run down (nor is he lavish of
praise either); and so he is not given to speaking evil himself, even of his enemies, except
when he deliberately intends to give offence. (1125a5-9)

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

287

LS: “Except out of hybris,” out of insolent pride. This is one of the passages which
Thomas Aquinas also tries to explain away, because the virtuous man doesn’t have
insolent pride under any condition. But that is not quite Aristotle’s view. For example,
Thomas Aquinas explains this passage as follows. He will not speak ill of enemies,
except in order to repel injuries which they have done to him, in other words, as part of
the warlike action of defense. xvii I think that mitigates it unnecessarily. Aristotle means
that they use insolent pride under certain conditions. For example, Achilles regarding
Agamemnon: that is a case of hybris of a magnanimous man. Or in our age, when
Churchill, in a speech in 1940 called Hitler a guttersnipe, then this was of course also
such an act of hybris.xviii You know? After all, Hitler was infinitely more powerful at that
time than Churchill was, and [this was] however not an unworthy action, because it stated
in advance the truth, the final judgment on this opponent on this occasion. Good. Now let
us see, in 29—1125a18, I’m sorry.
Reader:
Such then being the Great-souled man, the corresponding character on the side of
deficiency is the Small-souled man, and on that of excess, the Vain man. These also are
not thought to be actually vicious, since they do no harm, but rather mistaken. The smallsouled man—
LS: So in other words, if we call “utilitarian” an ethics which deals only with harming
and helping, then Aristotle would say that is much too narrow. There are qualities which
are in themselves neither harmful nor helpful and yet are ugly, distortions. They are ugly
to look at, like these. For example, the vain men are mostly harmless people—well,
except if their vanity is hurt, then the situation becomes different. But then it’s no longer
the vain men but the revengeful ones. Now read on.
Reader:
The small-souled man deprives himself of the good thing that he deserves; and his failure
to claim good things makes it seem that he has something bad about him [and also that he
does not know himself],xix for (people sayxx), if he deserved any good, he would try to
obtain it. Not that such persons are considered foolish, but rather too retiring; yet this
estimate of them is thought to make them still worse, for men’s ambitions show what
they are worth, and if they hold aloof from noble enterprises and pursuits, and forgo the
good things of life, presumably they think they are not worthy of them. (1125a16-27)
LS: In other words, even shyness is a vice, but not a terrible vice. But it is a vice because
it may prevent a man from doing his very best, and especially if you think of a man who
would be a first-rate statesman and would be too shy to run for office, [that] would be a
defect.

xvii

Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §779.
In a radio broadcast on 22 June 1941.
xix
Brackets are Rackham’s.
xx
In Rackham’s translation: “argue.”
xviii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

288

Reader:
The vain on the other hand are foolish persons, who are deficient in self-knowledge and
expose their defect: they undertake honourable responsibilities of which they are not
worthy, and then are found out. They are ostentatious in dress, manner and so on. They
want people to know how well off they are, and talk about it, imagining that this will
make them respected.
Smallness of Soul is more opposed than Vanity to Greatness of Soul, being both more
prevalent and worse. (1125a27-34)
LS: Worse for the reason given: because it may prevent a man from actualizing his
highest potentialities. And the vain man is only a ridiculous individual, but not a harmful
individual.
Student: Why does he say it’s more prevalent, smallness-of-soul, than vanity?
LS: Well, that was the way in which he saw things. Where did he stand in order to see
that? Most men, Aristotle asserts, are given rather to underestimating themselves; to be
kind of crawling beings than boastful beings. Is this not intelligible? I mean, is this not
even true today that most people do not raise a high claim? I mean, if you are literal and
do not merely think of opinion leaders and such people but speak of the general mass of
men. Surely it is a remarkable statement.
There are two more passages that I think we should consider. Yes, now then he speaks in
the sequel of another virtue which has to do with small honors, say, not the great honors
but decorations or titles. So there is also a proper attitude not totally to despise them,
because that would be a contempt of the established political order; say, in France
especially, but in other countries too. On the other hand, to be too eager to display
innumerable decorations, that is ridiculous also. The right thing is to have few
distinguished decorations and to exhibit them on the proper occasions. Good. And now
Aristotle goes then over to gentleness, which is the proper posture toward anger. And—
you wanted to say something?
Student: Why does he pursue it in this way? Particularly concerned with the transition
from great-souled man to the virtue with respect to small honors. There is a
clear . . . especially with respect to the virtues of wealth, but in that case he speaks of the
virtues with respect to wealth in general at first, and then munificence.
LS: Munificence, yes. Yes, but then having spoken of the right posture towards great
expenses, he goes over towards the right posture toward great honors and then goes down
to smaller honors. I mean, it’s not schematic, what he presents, but there is a kind of
association here. Now gentleness has to do with anger. All previous virtues had to do
with desire, desire or for that matter aversion, but not anger. The only virtue dealing with
anger is gentleness. That is here at the end of these discussions. We can perhaps read one
passage, 1126a29.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

289

Reader:
We consider the excess to be more opposed to Gentleness than the defect, because it
occurs more frequently, human nature being more prone to seek redress than to forgive;
and because the harsh-tempered are worse to live with than the unduly placable.
(1126a29-31)
LS: This being the case with the greater frequency again here, it follows that the men
who are less given to anger than is proper are preferable to those who are more than
properly given to anger. In other words, people who do not get angry, who are altogether
free from anger, are very rare. And in addition, for living together they are very easy,
because they are never angry, whatever you do to them. But thereafter, in the next chapter
he deals then with what one now may call the social virtues in the narrow sense of the
term, the virtues belonging to association of a nonbusinesslike character. The social
graces he mentions. There is only one point which we must consider, 1128b3 to 4, or
begin 1128b1.
Reader:
The buffoon is one who cannot resist a joke; he will not keep his tongue off himself or
anyone else, if he can raise a laugh, and will say things which a man of refinement would
never say, and some of which he would not even allow to be said to him. The boor is of
no use in playful conversation: he contributes nothing and takes offense at everything; yet
relaxation and amusement seem to be a necessary element in life. (1128a33-b4)
LS: This is one of the other none-too-frequent references to the ends of the virtues, which
would have to be considered coherently if one wants to see that Aristotle’s list of virtues,
as he presents it, is in his view exhaustive. For example, there is desire and fear and
anger; there is money, there are honors. And now then also leisure and playfulness are a
part of life, and therefore there must be virtues in this respect too. So one would have to
put all these considerations together in order to see whether whether Aristotle exhausts
the list of virtues as he claims he does.
This is then the end of the discussion of the virtues in general, followed only by a brief
discussion of sense of shame and moral indignation, to which Aristotle denies the status
of virtues. Sense of shame in particular is all right with young people, who cannot yet
have acquired the habit of virtue perfectly and therefore will make mistakes and then they
should blush for them. It is even an adornment for them. But for a mature man to blush
and to have to blush, that is deplorable. He should never make a mistake. Aristotle
apparently regards it as possible that a man can live throughout his life and never make a
mistake after he has sown his wild oats; that is somehow implied in what he says here
about the sense of shame as becoming young people. Yes. Now someone has raised his
hand in the meantime. Oh, Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: You pointed out earlier in the course that the sense of shame was the closest we
came to piety. The other place where—

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

290

LS: Well, aidōs, the Greek word, does not have the narrow sense always in which
Aristotle uses it here, where it means only blushing because of a blunder one has
committed. But aidōs also means the posture of a kind of holy shame, reverence. It has
this meaning very frequently. For example, in the myth of the Protagoras, Zeus is
supposed to have given to all men aidōs (sense of shame) and dikē (sense of right).xxi
There it has this high and awe-inspiring meaning. Not here in Aristotle. For Aristotle, a
sense of shame is understood in the narrow sense and therefore regarded as something
unbecoming [to] a grown-up man.
Same Student: The other place where he deals with that is in talking of the pseudocourage.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: The courage of the citizen–soldier who doesn’t run because he’s afraid
that if he does, someone might do something to him. Would that indicate also—I mean,
thats a kind of virtue. It’s not—
LS: But that is not genuine courage, he has a—
Same Student: That’s not genuine courage, but it’s a—
LS: Yes, sure. Aristotle makes allowance for all kinds of intermediate cases, but this does
not however make dubious the fundamental distinctions as he lays them down. A man
who acts bravely on the field of battle from sense of shame is not a brave man. He must
[do this] out of a sense of the nobility of the action and not [because of] what people will
say behind his back or even to his face.
Same Student: Would that be the kind of thing where piety is formed?
LS: Piety does not occur as a virtue in Aristotle’s Ethics at all.
Same Student: I was suggesting it might be a pseudo-virtue, in the same way that—
LS: Yes, but that he does in a well-known passage of the Metaphysics, in book 12, when
at the end of his theology he contrasts his view of the god as it is presented there with the
traditional view, the ancestral view. And he says that fundamentally what the ancestral
view aimed at was this notion of god as Aristotle presented it, but they added quite a few
things in order to influence the many toward obedience to the laws,xxii and here is where
that would come in. But that is something which does not belong to the gentleman; this
view belongs to the many. Yes?
Student: With regard to irony, it seems that irony appears differently when it’s viewed
from, say, what you called the peak of magnanimity than it does from the peak of justice.
xxi
xxii

Plato, Protagoras 322c-d.
Aristotle, Metaphysics 1074a38-b14.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

291

That is to say, you said that it was becoming to be . . . being a boaster and being ironic,
but that’s not strictly speaking a parallel. I mean, irony isn’t parallel to boasting, because
a boaster, at least as I understand it, is someone who doesn’t understand himself correctly
and therefore demands too much. But an ironic man would be someone who does
understand himself correctly but nevertheless demands too little.
LS: And therefore what is wrong with Aristotle’s judgment?
Same Student: Well, I mean it would seem that the mean of speaking would be—I
mean, regarding yourself incorrectly and for that reason demanding too little.
LS: No, that is not a matter of demanding; that was discussed in the section on
magnanimity. Here it is simply a matter of social meetings (say, cocktail parties) where
no business is transacted or involved, no public assembly or what have you, and how you
behave properly or gracefully there. And then if a man would say: “I haven’t”—to take
an example from our sphere here—“I have not yet published anything,” while he has [in
fact] published four articles, [this] would be not right. There is some impropriety there,
because he should not make himself smaller, if that is a sign of smallness, than he is. Or
the other way around: although if a man has published, say, five hundred articles, or five
hundred twelve, to be exact, and would say in these words, “I have published five
hundred twelve articles,” there would also be a slight impropriety there. He would
probably say, “I don’t know how many articles I have written.” But that is the only
consideration which comes in here. And the ironical man would say, “I have not
published anything,” although he has published four articles, and there is then something
improper, because he makes himself—he doesn’t show the proper frankness and
therewith the proper politeness to the people with whom he is together by understating
his worth. But in other areas of society, for example, if he is in the army as a private,
where there is no one in the whole regiment, maybe, who ever claims to have written
anything or wishes to have written anything, then it might be much better if he would
conceal the fact that he has ever published anything. It depends on the circumstance.
Good. Yes?
Student: There appear to be four types of . . . naturally, I don’t know what appears in the
Greek—but the question is: do these four types of shame appear in Aristotle? The [first]
appears as shame before one’s fellow man for, say, lack of bravery or something like
that?
LS: Yes, he mentions that.
Same Student: Then shame before the law, shame before the law of the city. Then there
might appear to be shame, possibly shame before nature, before what is known to be right
naturally. And finally, shame before the gods. Now the last two might have an element of
piety within them, or what could be called piety.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

292

LS: Yes, but Aristotle means that shame, that which makes you blush, and with
reference, explicit or implicit, to other human beings. That is, I think, what he has in
mind.
Same Student: There is nothing before the law?
LS: That is still surely not meant here. Now this is now the end of the discussion of all
virtues, with the exception of a single one, and that is justice. And to justice the whole
[of] book 5 is devoted. The discussion of justice is the second peak of the two peaks of
the discussion of moral virtues in the Ethics, and we should read that. Perhaps we begin
at the beginning. Do you have it?
Reader:
In regard to Justice and Injustice, we have to enquire what sort of actions precisely they
are concerned with, in what sense Justice is the observance of a mean, and what are the
extremes between which that which is just is a mean. (1129a2-5)
LS: Now this question regarding what kind of mean justice is comes up for the following
reason. In all previous cases, Aristotle could find a virtue as a mean between two faulty
extremes. But in the case of justice, that is not possible. What is the vice to which justice
is opposed? Anyone can answer this.
Student: Injustice.
LS: Injustice. Very good. And what is the unjust man, in the broadest terms?
Student: He’s an extremist. [Laughter]
LS: Yes, you can put it this way, but it is too general. The boaster is also an extremist,
but he wishes to be benefited more than he deserves, and he wishes to pay less than he
should. Yes? Good. And then you have the just man who says: I will pay all my taxes and
[fulfill] all my other duties to society, and I do not claim any privileges to which I’m not
entitled. That’s all right. But what about the man who does not stand up for his rights,
who takes less than he has a right to? Far from taking away from others, he gives more to
the others than he is obliged to give. Is this not also a faulty extreme: the just man
standing up for his rights but only for his rights; the unjust man standing up for his
claims, right or wrong; and then this other nameless man, who does not even stand up for
his rights? That is the point. This [latter] is not by Aristotle regarded as a vice. And
therefore justice is not in this sense a mean between two extremes. If you demand less
than is your due, that is not a vice. That’s the difficulty. And yet, nevertheless, justice is
in a way a mean, but not in that simple way in which the other virtues are means between
two faulty extremes. That is the meaning of this somewhat seemingly cumbersome
expression. Now let us go on. Do you wonder how this could be?
Student: Well, it . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

293

LS: This he will explain. He will explain that later on. Now go on.
Reader:
Our enquiry may follow the same procedure as our preceding investigations.
Now we observe that everybody means by Justice the habitxxiii which renders men apt to
do just things, and which causes them to act justly and to wish what is just; and similarly
by Injustice that habitxxiv which makes men act unjustly and wish what is unjust. Let us
then assume these things xxv to start with as broadly correct.
The fact is that it is not the same with habitxxvi as with sciences and faculties. It seems
that the same faculty or science deals with opposite things; but a habitxxvii which produces
a certain result does not also produce the opposite results; for example, health does not
give rise to unhealthy actions, but only to healthy ones— (1129a5-16)
LS: Now what does this distinction between habits and abilities or powers mean? A
simple example: a man who can write very quickly and yet legibly can also write very
slowly and legibly, and he can also write, if he wants to, very illegibly. That is part of the
dynamis, the power which he has. But a man who is decent—that’s a habit—cannot act
indecently. That is, a man who can act both decently and indecently, or can use virtue and
vice as he sees fit, as Machiavelli would put it, is of course not a decent man. That is a
simple explanation of the difference. The virtues are habits, and therefore the virtuous
man cannot act viciously. In some Platonic dialogues, for example, the Smaller Hippias,
that is the fun of the dialogue, that the distinction between habit and power, ability, is
disregarded. For example, Achilles never lied and therefore is regarded as a more decent
man than Odysseus, who frequently lied. But then Socrates tries to refute Hippias and
says: “Well, would we not regard a man who can do both good shoes and bad shoes [as] a
better shoemaker than a man who can do only bad shoes, because the man who can make
good shoes can also, if he so wishes, make bad shoes?” Yes, now let us go on. Oh, no—
here’s someone.
Student: Isn’t it in a way, though, this statement directed against Socrates?
LS: Only it is not explicit polemic, here, but yes.
Same Student: Then to say that . . . Socrates to say that, runs into that?
LS: Yes, and it is reasonable to assume that Aristotle always had in mind this Socratic–
Platonic—
Same Student: What would Socrates’s response be? Would he have a response to—?
xxiii

In Rackham’s translation: “that moral disposition.”
In Rackham’s translation: “disposition.”
xxv
In Rackham’s translation: “this definition.”
xxvi
In Rackham’s translation: “dispositions.”
xxvii
In Rackham’s translation: “disposition or condition.”
xxiv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

294

LS: We have taken up this subject on more than one occasion. It leads to this: it is
connected with the whole notion of phronēsis, practical wisdom. From Aristotle’s point
of view, practical wisdom has principles of its own and therefore can be treated
independently of wisdom, theoretical wisdom. Socrates and Plato seem to deny that, by
deed as well as by speech, and therefore this leads to the consequence that the whole of
thinking life, of philosophy, is phronēsis, is practical wisdom. By denying, as it were, the
distinction between phronēsis and sophia, practical wisdom and wisdom proper, Socrates
is led to all these other theses which are only the reverse side of his famous assertion that
virtue is knowledge, which Aristotle accepts only in a very qualified sense, as we have
partly already seen. Good. Yes?
Reader:
Hence sometimes the nature of one of two opposite habits is inferred from the
other, sometimes habits xxviii are known from the things in which they are found;
for instance, if we know what good bodily condition is, we know from this what
bad condition is as well, but we also know what good condition is from bodies in
good condition, and know what bodies are in good condition from knowing what
good condition is. Thus supposing good condition is firmness of flesh, bad
condition must be flabbiness of flesh, and a diet productive of good condition
must be a diet producing firmness of flesh.
Also, if one of two correlative groups of words is used in several senses, it
follows as a rule that the other is used in several senses too: for example, if ‘just’
has more than one meaning, so also has ‘unjust’ and ‘Injustice.’ Now it appears—
LS: This is all preparatory, and it becomes intelligible only from the conclusion, which
he is just about about to draw, namely:
Reader:
Now it appears that the terms Justice and Injustice are used in several senses, but
as their equivocal uses are closely connected, their equivocation is not detected;
whereas in the case of widely different things called by a common name, the
equivocation is comparatively obvious: for example (the difference being
considerable when it is one of external form), the equivocal use of the word kleis
(key) to denote both the bone at the base of the neck and the instrument with
which we lock our doors.
Let us then ascertain in how many senses a man is said to be ‘unjust.’ Now the
term ‘unjust’ is held to apply both to the man who breaks the law and the man
who takes more than his due, the unfair man. Hence it is clear that the law-abiding
man and the fair man will both be just. (1129a17-34)
LS: So Aristotle is leading up to the thesis that there are two different virtues, both called
justice. And we see that most easily, Aristotle suggests, if we look at their opposites. In
xxviii

In Rackham’s translation: “disposition.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

295

the one case, the man who is not just is called unjust in the other case he is called—how
does he translate pleonektēs?
Reader: “Unfair.”
LS: “Unfair.” Whether that is the best English equivalent I do not know, but at any rate
in the Greek language this is sufficient. Now he will make more clear these differences,
and he speaks first of justice in one sense. “For the just is.”
Reader:
‘The just’ therefore means that which is lawful and that which is equal or fair, and
‘the unjust’ means that which is illegal and that which is unequal or unfair.
Again, as the unjust man is one who takes the larger share, he will be unjust in
respect of good things; not all good things, but those on which good and bad
fortune depend. These though always good in the absolute sense, are not always
good for a particular person. Yet these are the goods men pray for and pursue,
although they ought not to do so; they ought, while choosing the things that are
good for them, to pray that what is good simply xxix may also be good for them.
The unjust man does not however always choose the larger share: of things that,
speaking simply,xxx are bad he chooses the smaller share; but nevertheless he is
thought to take more than his due, because the lesser of two evils seems in a sense
to be a good, and taking more than one’s due means taking more than one’s due
of good. Let us call him ‘unfair,’ for that is a comprehensive term, and includes
both taking too much of good things and too little of bad things.
LS: In Greek the word is “unequal,” but he translates it by “unfair.” Yes?
Reader:
Again, we saw that the law-breaker is unjust and the law-abiding man just. It is therefore
clear that all lawful things are just, in one sense of the word— (1129a34-b12)
LS: “Just in a sense,” I would translate. Just in a sense. All lawful things are just, in a
sense. And what Aristotle will develop in the sequel is then that there is a kind of
virtue—there is a virtue called justice, by which is meant the virtue embracing all other
virtues from the point of view of our relations to other human beings, corresponding to
magnanimity insofar as it presupposes all other virtues but differing from magnanimity,
because magnanimity considers this all-embracing virtue from the point of view of the
perfection of the individual by itself, where relations to others do not as such enter the
notion.
Yes. Now all the legal things are, in a manner, just. That must be taken very seriously,
because if Aristotle would omit this qualification [and say simply that] all legal things are
xxix
xxx

In Rackham’s translation: “absolutely.”
In Rackham’s translation: “speaking absolutely.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

296

just, then he would speak absurdly, would he not? That would mean there cannot be
unjust laws. But why should there not be the possibility, at least, of unjust laws? Yet, in a
manner, all legal or lawful things are just. That means that the most extreme injustice
would not even limit itself by unjust laws. Unjust laws, very unjust laws, by the mere fact
that they are laws, limit injustice. One could see an example of that in Nazi Germany,
where some of the older type of judges tried to apply the Nuremberg laws to the Jews.
And this was a boon for the Jews who came before this kind of judges, because there was
some limit by the mere fact that there were laws. And what an arbitrary judge would do
went much beyond that. So there is a virtue in law as law, but not virtue enough because
laws, as we said and as is obvious, may be unjust. Yes?
Student: Is that always the case? I mean, one of the great problems now is that there are
a lot of people in this country who feel that there are laws that, even in spite of the fact of
their being laws, do not even limit the injustice but in fact promote it, and so their
recourse is to go outside the law and to—
LS: Well, this raises very grave questions, not only of a practical but also of a theoretical
nature. It has to do with the great question: is there a sphere of privacy? Is this not
necessarily implied in the notion of a just order? Now if that is so, then it means that
there is a sphere regarding which the law is rather powerless and regarding which you
cannot expect improvement by means of laws. Could this not be? The abolition of the
private sphere, that would mean what they now call totalitarianism: that there is no sphere
totally exempt from the law. I think this is precisely the issue. In other words, the
temptation that we would say that laws made for unjust purposes are nevertheless to be
obeyed, that is not so great. But laws made for fair and just purposes may nevertheless
contradict the nature of law insofar as they destroy the refuge of privacy. That is exactly
what Plato presents in the Republic, where there is no privacy whatever—what they claim
ironically for Socrates: that Socrates had no private life, he was always in public. But of
course one must ask oneself: did he not at least go home in the night for sleeping a few
hours? Plato shows us what happened when he was at home in bed, at the beginning of
the Protagoras, you know, when Socrates was still asleep, so there was nothing fishy in
any way about it.
Now Plato in the Republic tries to establish an order in which injustice is altogether
impossible, and the simple device is this: there is no privacy. Injustice presupposes
secrecy, because even the worst gangsters of course do not boast in public of their
misdeeds. You know? They live by virtue of the secrecy of what they are doing. Now if
you abolish secrecy, you abolish vice. That is what Plato proposes in the Republic. There
is no room which cannot be entered by any man [at] any time of the day or night; not
only are all rooms bugged, but they can even be entered without a search warrant at any
time of the day. Abolish secrecy, abolish privacy: abolish vice. Plato experiments with
this possibility in order to show its absurdity. This would of course not be sufficient, but
you would have to make every man a policeman or a detective watching over every other
man. Even this would not be quite sufficient, because there might be still some thoughts
which a man would never express and would still contain the seeds of disloyalty or what
have you.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16

297

Same Student: Just a brief question. Would it be possible though, to say, in terms of
what we just read, that there is such a thing as an unjust law?
LS: Well, a very simple example. If someone would propose a law that all people whose
family name begins with an A have to pay taxes, and all people whose family names
begin with B to Z do not have to pay taxes, is this not manifestly an unjust law?
Same Student: Yes.
LS: You would think it is not unjust?
Same Student: I would think it’s very unjust.
LS: What’s the principle?
Same Student: It discriminates against all the A’s.
LS: Yes. Well, maybe some kinds of discrimination are all right. I mean, for example,
you discriminate against people when you send them to jail, and it will always appear on
their record that they have been in jail. That is a kind of discrimination. So discrimination
as such is not such a bad thing, but I would say there is no principle involved [here]. If
you would say [that] those who can pay more should pay higher taxes, that makes some
sense.
Same Student: Well, it’s unreasonable, I guess that’s the best thing to say.
LS: Yes, but here there is no rhyme and reason. There is no connection with the
beginning of your family name and higher taxation, or taxation altogether. So there are
unjust laws, or at least they are possible. We could easily give other examples of a more
practical nature, because no one, I believe, has recently proposed such a tax legislation.
Yes, well, next time we will pursue the theme a little bit further that is not developed in
the Ethics but in the Politics. Aristotle makes clear in the Politics [that] the laws depend
on the regime. In a democracy, you have a different kind of laws than in an oligarchy, a
monarchy, an aristocracy, or whatever it may be. The laws depend on the regime, and
therefore the lawful, the legal, depends always on the regime. This has very far-reaching
consequences, namely, a man who is a good citizen in one kind of a regime is a bad
citizen in another kind of regime. A man who is a good citizen of a communist state is
likely to be a bad citizen in a liberal democracy, and therefore the good man cannot be
identical simply with the good citizen, because the good man as good man has no such
relativity to the regime as the good citizen has. And [there are] quite a few other
considerations which lead to the consequence as stated here: the legal or lawful things are
in a sense the just things. As Plato would say, the law wishes to be just but it does not
achieve that always, nor even most of the time perhaps, and therefore we have to
combine a practical obedience to the law in all cases except the extreme cases with a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 16
theoretical skepticism as to the claim of the law to be simply just. We will take this up
next time.

298

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

299

Session 17: April 17, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —meaning either universal justice or particular justice.
For . . . the just may be the lawful or legal and the unjust would probably be the illegal:
the breach of the law. Or the just may be [the] fair or equal. In the latter case there is no
reference to law; in the first case the reference to law is essential. In the latter case the
unjust man is the man who takes away from others what belongs to them; or, which is
only another aspect of the same thing, he tries to impose on others a heavier burden than
he is willing to accept for himself. Now Aristotle speaks first of justice in the first sense,
in the legal sense of universal justice, and I think we should repeat a certain passage
which we began to read last time, b11.
Reader:
Sincei the law-breaker is unjust and the law-abiding man just, it is therefore clear that all
lawful things are, in a sense, just, for what is lawful is decided by legislation.
LS: “By the legislative art,” let us rather say.
Reader:
And each of these decisions we say is ‘just.’ Now all the various pronouncements of the
law aim either at the common good of all, or of the best, or of the rulers, determined
either by virtue or in some other similar way, so that in one sense we say ‘just things’ are
things that produce and preserve the happiness and the parts of the happiness of the
political community. (1129b11-19)
LS: Let us stop here. Aristotle does not say that the legal things are [the] just things.
Rather, he says the legal things are in a sense the just things. Now in which sense? Later
on he speaks, in the passage which we have read, of the legislative art. Things laid down
not by a random legislator or legislative body but by the legislative art could be said to be
good laws; and therefore these things laid down by the legislative art are just things. But
the things laid down by a legislator or legislative body are not necessarily just, because
the possibility of mistake is considerable. One could also state it as follows. The laws
wish to be, intend to be just, but they do not always achieve that, and therefore a simple
equation of the legal with the just is not reasonable. And one can also state it as follows:
the laws depend on—we can say are the function of—the regimes, so the laws fitting,
proper, in a democracy would not be proper in an oligarchy, and so on and so on.
Now all laws, according to Aristotle in the Politics, are relative to the regime, and ought
to be relative because otherwise there will be a great complication between the principle
informing the regime as a whole and the law. But now some regimes are defective and
others are nondefective, and therefore the laws relative to a defective regime are by their
very principle not good laws. So a simple equation of the legal with the just is impossible.

i

The reader apparently reads from his own translation.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

300

One can give another reason why this simple equation of the legal with the just is not
possible. Let us look later on in book 10, 1180a21, where Aristotle says the law has a
compulsory power, being a logos, a discourse stemming from some practical wisdom and
reason. “From some”: he does not simply say from practical wisdom. But let us pass over
that. Law has a coercive, compelling force, and this compelling force is here traced to its
rational origin. But this is not the whole story, of course. In another passage in the
Politics, in the second book, 1269a20 to 21, Aristotle says the law has no force toward
being obeyed apart from custom or habituation, i.e., it has no force stemming from its
rationality, but only from its being customary. Now this is a clear contradiction, which
doesn’t mean that Aristotle was not in a position to resolve the contradiction or did not in
fact resolve it if we read him with sufficient clarity, but it indicates a problem. As
rational, if the law is a dictamen rectae rationis, a dictate of right reason, then it would by
right exercise a compelling force because of its rationality. But the law is not simply that.
And in order to be a law it cannot be merely rational, and therefore there is an addition of
something else, of an x which qualifies the rationality of the law but makes it in this way
more compelling for the mass of the citizens. And this means, however, again, to repeat,
that the law is not simply rational; the law is not simply just.
Now this is of course an embarrassing view, although one can say it is the only view in
accordance with fact, because to say simply, “Every law is worthy to be obeyed
regardless,” cannot be maintained by any sensible man, except perhaps by someone who
has adopted this particular position called legal positivism: that there is no higher
standard for law except that it has been adopted by a community, and that that is all there
is to it. Because if we are, say, anticommunist, as I hope we all are, then we will say that
people who are very lawabiding subjects of a communist state are in a deplorable
position, to put it mildly—and the communists will of course return this compliment to
us.
So wherever you find any adherence to principles, we find there the admission, the
recognition, of a principle higher than the positive law. And of course the questions
concerning this higher principle are more complicated and more dark than the questions
of positive law, however complicated, because the question of the positive law you can
always eventually refer to an oracle, namely, to the view of the legislator, whose clear,
explicit statement finishes all controversy. And we do not have this in the field of the
higher law. But one could raise this question: is it not a dangerous principle, leading to all
kinds of turmoil and civil disobedience and so on, to question the identity of the just and
the legal? More particularly, did not Socrates, in a way, die for the principle that the just
is the legal, namely, by giving his argument against escaping from prison in Plato’s Crito,
where he seems to say that one has to obey the laws of the city regardless? What would
you say to this argument? Some of you have read the Crito, I take it. Does Socrates say
there that one must obey every law regardless? Yes?
Student: No . . . if one has accepted the protection of the laws of the city. If one has put
himself under the law’s protection, then one has to obey the law. But not every law—
every man must not obey every law, period. It’s not as simple as all that.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

301

LS: Yes, but is not even this argument, the contractual argument that everyone has made
a contract with the law, with the city of the laws: is even this unqualifiedly stated there?
Is the whole argument of the Crito based on the contractual view of legal obligation? Mr.
Zinman, you shake your head, so you must have another opinion.
Mr. Zinman: I think that it is not, but I think that perhaps the problem of the Crito
cannot be explained with reference simply to the question of the legal and the just, in the
sense of positive justice or the justice of the laws of Athens.
LS: But is the distinction made there between the positive law—
Mr. Zinman: No.
LS: No, it’s nowhere. As far the contractual argument and its limitation, the relation of
the citizen to the law is compared not only to that of a man who has made a contract with
another man or body of men but also to the relation of the children to the parents, which
is clearly not a contractual relation. But still, do we have a broader consideration showing
the limited claim of the reasoning of the Crito?
Student: I don’t recall if this is in the Crito or not, but Socrates refused to abide by the
laws promoted by the tyranny, by the Thirty.
LS: Yes, but one could of course say that the tyrants were illegal rulers, could one not?
And therefore this is not valid in itself. There is another point in the Apology, which is a
parallel work. Socrates discusses this possibility. The citizens of Athens as his judges
might propose the following compromise: Socrates 1 [now stops doing] what he has been
doing all the time to the annoyance of his fellow citizens. And he calls that
philosophizing; so he stops philosophizing from now, and then they will leave him alone
and will permit him to die in peace and not to be executed. What does Socrates say to this
proposal, which he proposes there for argument’s sake, which no one else proposes? He
would not consider it.ii Now the proposal of the city would easily take the form of a law:
whoever philosophizes will be punished with death, or maybe with a fine, or with exile,
or whatever it may be. Socrates refuses to obey such a prohibition. So although this is not
stated in the Crito,2 it is stated in the parallel dialogue. There is one crucial qualification:
Socrates reserves the right to philosophize. He has no list of rights of man. The right on
which the whole issue turns in the case of Socrates’s trial is the right of men like Socrates
to philosophize.
So Socrates does not simply assert that the just is identical with the legal or vice versa, to
say nothing of other considerations which come in and which permit one to say that the
argument speaking in favor of Socrates dying in prison is a prudential argument. Why
does Socrates mention the fact that he is an old man? Because it is relevant. No one can
say what Socrates would have done if he had been thirty instead of seventy. He also
discusses the possibility of available places of refuge, and he finds there is none. Either
he goes to a nearby place where he is known, and then [he] will be known as a fugitive
ii

Apology of Socrates 37e-38a.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

302

from justice: that’s a most undignified position for a man like Socrates. Or he goes to a
faraway place like Thessaly in the north. There they are loose-living people and very
lawless people, and it would not be nice to live there. So the question of course would
be—if we are practical people, we’d say maybe there is a faraway place which is not
lawless. And as a matter of fact, an allusion is made [to the possibility] that such places
did exist, namely, the island of Crete, which had a reputation—well, a dubious reputation,
but only one part of the reputation is considered here. The Cretans were known as great
liars, but on the other side, Crete, being the mother of Sparta, as it were, was regarded as
a very well-ordered community. And Crete is far away. But this line is not pursued. Be
this as it may, the argument of the Crito is a prudential argument. And only in
circumstances like Socrates’s case would it be wise to obey the law unqualifiedly. But
still, one thing of course is quite true. The rule of thumb, the best rule of thumb is: “Obey
the law, without ifs and buts.” But all rules of thumb permit exceptions, otherwise they
would be strict rules. And a strict rule of law in effect would require that all laws are just,
period; and this, to repeat, no sensible man can maintain. That there is a certain
unevenness and a certain lack of mathematical elegance there if you have to add
qualifications is quite true, but who told us that life is to be as elegant as a beautiful
mathematical proof? Only people who wish that, like Thomas Hobbes and so, made this
the principle of politics. Good. Mr. . . .
Student: In one way, though, the example of the Crito and the Apology does seem to be a
bit more simple in the sense that the problem of the philosopher seems to be the easy
problem in this case rather than the hard problem, and that if the rule is that all men but
philosophers must regard the legal as the same as the just, that seems to be an insufficient
rule for practical life and for any political question.
LS: Yes, you can say that, but on the other hand it is not quite so simple, because we
must look for the principle: the principle on the ground of which one claims not to be
bound by the law. Mere convenience is of course no ground whatever. Nor would they
have regarded mere conscience [as a sufficient ground], because it would be a question,
what kind of a conscience is that which opposes this or that law.
So what is the principle on the basis of which one can resist the positive law? Must it not
be something higher than the positive law? Must it not be something higher than political
society? Now what is there in the world from the point of view of Socrates or Plato that is
higher than political society? Philosophy. Not poetry, because poetry is a matter which
the polis is competent to regulate—you know, the tragedies and comedies were an affair
of the city. Now if you say religion: religion as such did not exist. I mean, that was called
piety, but piety was regarded as an affair of the polis. And only to the extent to which it
transcended the polis—and that meant insofar as it was based on true knowledge—would
it be beyond the competence of the city. Mr. Shulsky?
Mr. Shulsky: Would Aristotle and Plato have recognized any claims of justice in this
second sense, particular justice, or fairness, or equality of one sort or another as a claim
that could possibly be put against the city . . . made what would seem to be a manifestly
unjust law in the sense of an unfair law?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

303

LS: Yes, sure, for example, in the case we discussed last time, that all men whose names
begin with an A pay twice as much tax as the rest. Surely. But then there would have
been a very broad popular movement that would not be isolated. Or take another case: the
case of the trial of the generals after the battle of Arginusae. When Socrates appealed to
the law, to the positive law, that the nine generals should not be tried and condemned in
the same day but [rather], I think, each on one day, the people of Athens simply
disregarded their own law out of political emotion stirred up by demagogues. Well, then
here it was perfectly clear that the people of Athens acted illegally. The question of
principle does not even arise. Surely there can be unjust laws, but then the question
arises: can you simply disregard the law and disobey it because you are hurt by it, or,
which is a higher ground, because it is intrinsically unjust? Can you do that? You have to
weigh the price to be paid. You know? The question is not frequently discussed, but it is
discussed, for example, by Aristotle in the second book of the Politics, when he speaks of
Hippodamus’s proposal that laws should be changed. iii With the progress of
enlightenment, the laws should also progress. You remember that? What does Aristotle
say to the question?
Mr. Shulsky: He says in connection with Athens, that the laws tend to form habits . . .
LS: So Aristotle says one must be very cautious, and that means that even if a law is oldfashioned and still linked up with earlier views no longer shared by all members of the
community, you have to consider what you do—you lose in social discipline to that
extent. And I think something of this kind . . . Yes. Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: Are you saying that that’s Mr. Zinman’s question . . . have to look to some
realm outside of the political realm. Yet Socrates’s proposal, which you say he didn’t
really want, was not that he be simply denied to be allowed to philosophize, but that he
be denied to be allowed to be philosophizing in public. And that seems—I wonder, isn’t
that a distinction which has to be made, because if he would have just simply lived
quietly, he might have avoided the inconveniences?
LS: Yes, but this would never cause an issue, because even in Stalin’s Russia, if someone
like Socrates had been living there, had been a Stakhanovitic worker and had always
shouted “Heil Stalin” or whatever formula they used there, nothing would ever have
happened to him. The issue arises only if someone is not a Stakhanovitic worker and does
not shout “Heil Stalin.” You know? And that apparently is what Socrates did. So in other
words, if philosophizing means only thinking by himself and not being fooled by the
propaganda in one’s thought, that’s easy. But if he makes use of that and speaks to others,
and communicates to others his observations, then and only then does it cause a political
and legal issue. Surely this distinction is very important, but not in this way in which you
mean it or in which you expressed it. Mr. Fawcet?
Student: Well, just returning for a moment to the problem of the unjust law: it seems that
Socrates had an awfully convenient out, his being seventy and not having any place to go.
iii

Aristotle, Politics 1267b22-1268a15.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

304

But you brought up the point, well, if he had been thirty instead of seventy, the situation
would have been much different. I just wondered if there is some place where we could
turn to at least get some evidence that might have shown how Socrates might have acted
had that been the case. I mean, that’s a real confrontation against the person of Socrates
and it’s against the philosophizing of which he’s representative, and I can’t think of any
kind of a similar confrontation anywhere else.
LS: No, but of course this may be partly due to the fact that Socrates died for the cause of
philosophy [and] that the Athenians regretted it soon afterwards. You know, that is the
tradition, at least: that they regretted it soon afterward, and it never happened in the same
way again. And when Aristotle was later on forced to flee, this may [have been] due to
purely political reasons.
Same Student: That speaks to the Athenians, but that doesn’t speak to us.
LS: Well, how come while there were quite a few persecutions of philosophers prior to
Socrates in Athens, these persecutions stopped in Athens afterwards and the school
established by Plato lived on until 529? So something seems to have changed. There is a
statement of Plutarch in his biography of Nicias as to what Plato has achieved: that he
made philosophy acceptable to the polis. Socrates and Plato are not the same person, but
they obviously belong together. After all, Plato dedicated his whole written work to the
memory of Socrates, to say the least. And Plato brought about a reconciliation between
the polis and philosophy and bridged the gulf to the extent to which that gulf can be
bridged. Now the difficulties did not completely disappear; there were persecutions of
philosophers in the Roman Empire and so on, and therefore something like Socrates’s
action had to be taken from time to time again. But the principles of the solution, one can
say, were established by Plato, but it is not an elegant solution, because the elegant
solution, as Plato himself makes clear in the Republic, is that the philosophers become
kings. There is something improper, in Plato’s view, that the philosophers, being most
concerned in the highest degree with wisdom, should obey less wise people: the citizen
body as legislator. If you replace the democratic citizen body by the king and his
courtiers, you do not fundamentally change the situation, because the king and his
courtiers are not necessarily wiser than a democratic citizen body. This difficulty will
remain, and there is no universally valid solution, but [there are] compromises with
different alignments, as it were, in different places and circumstances. Yes?
Student: Would the problem arise neither on the highest level nor on the lowest level,
but for Aristotle on the level of the virtuous man, in the sense that the virtuous man
would accord action according to rational principle, and he, as the possessor of that
principle, not needing the highest wisdom? It seems like the problem could arise just as
clearly on that level . . .
LS: Yes, but still let us assume that, for argument’s sake. So the man of practical
wisdom, the phronimos, has the principle of right action in himself and he doesn’t need
either philosophy or the civil legislator, at least as far as the principle is concerned. But

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

305

how can you be sure that the legislator, the actual legislator, will respect the opinions of
the phronimos, of the man of practical wisdom? Can you be sure of that?
Same Student: But I don’t—
LS: And then he would be in exactly the same position as the philosopher.
Same Student: That’s what I’m, that’s what I was—
LS: So that is not sufficient.
Same Student: No, but that’s what I was saying. It seems to me the problem could arise
on a lower level.
LS: Yes, sure. Sure, sure. There can be simply a decent man without any claims to
philosophy and such highfalutin’ things. And yet [he can] come into the same kind of
conflict with the polis which Socrates . . . That is a problem. One can say that is the
political problem: that we need the polis as human beings, and yet the polis is also a great
danger. But the necessity is so overpoweringly more strong than the danger that we have
to accept. And the polis is not quite the same thing as the modern state, but it has
something to do with that. And of the state Nietzsche said—and this is a favorite word of
Charles de Gaulle—[that it is] the “cold monster.” Well, the ancients were not so full of
fearing as Nietzsche was, and so they wouldn’t say “cold” and hold this against it, but
something corresponding to it. The cold monster. And of course de Gaulle, as I am
inclined to believe, doesn’t hold this against the state: it’s rather a pet, you know, which
he pets, “you sweet little cold monster.” [Laughter]
Another Student: This relates, I think, indirectly to that. It has to do with the nature of a
contract. Doesn’t the entire symbol of a contract become much stronger when you
realize, as the ancients must have, that the contracting party, the state, was not positive
law, it was an organism which had grown and which could not be changed by a change of
regime? So that what it took for the contract was not a positive act on the part of the legal
citizens, but rather a positive act would be needed to break it. Every day that a man lived
under the law, he affirmed the natural relationship. Now if the regime did something
unnatural, did something improper, chances are it would be something that was contrary
to the nature of something which had grown up over a long time. Doesn’t a contract with
this sort of being, an organic being, represent something entirely different than a contract
with positive law?
LS: Well, your statement is in a way a model of a statement one should not make. One
should not make. In the first place, the contract is not a symbol. As long as people spoke
of the social contract, they meant it as a fact and not as a symbol. Secondly, organic: the
state is something organic and has nothing to do with the change of regimes. Who told
you that? I believe Edmund Burke.
Same Student: No.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

306

LS: But surely not Plato or Aristotle.
Same Student: Well, Aristotle ultimately rejected the contention that a polis totally
changes every time there’s a change of regime.
LS: Oh, he asserts it: that every time the regime changes, a new polis emerges.
Same Student: He finally drops that, that—
LS: He does not drop that. That is the great difficulty for the modern reader. If a
democracy is changed into an oligarchy, or vice versa, the democrats say in such a case
the city has disappeared, because there is no longer the city, the citizen-body, but a
clique, a junta. And there is no longer the polis. And the oligarchs would say the
opposite. They would probably not say, when the oligarchy is replaced by democracy,
that the city has disappeared, but they would say it has gone to pieces—you know, like
the British Conservatives when the Labour people came to power. Good. But that is
meant to be literally true, not merely a metaphoric and exaggerated expression. Now
what Aristotle says is this. The democrats exaggerate when the oligarchy is replaced by a
democracy; it is not true that the polis has disappeared, [that] there is no longer a polis.
Of course there is a polis, but another kind of polis: no longer a democracy but an
oligarchy. The unity of the polis depends on the unity of the regime, although not alone
on that. But this is the point.
Same Student: Not as form and matter. In other words—
LS: It has very much to do with form and matter. The form is the regime, and the matter
are the human beings, including what survives the unusual change of customs and habits
and so on. That is the view which we have some difficulties to understand, or had some
difficulties until the extreme and violent revolutions we witnessed in our century. Before
that time it seemed to be a wholly senseless assertion, to assert that. Aristotle knows of
another view. The consequence of this view, that the unity of the polis consists in the
unity of the regime and not of the matter; in other words, the [citizens’ being] the same
people. Whereas we would today say, of course: who has any doubt that there is such a
thing like a history of the British constitution from the days of Alfred the Great, if not
before that, up to Harold Wilson? Now Aristotle seems to say these were different
Britains [LS taps on the table]: the Anglo-Saxon Britain, the Norman Britain, let us say
the Tudors’ Britain, Oliver Cromwell’s Britain, and the Britain of William of Orange, and
so on. We understand it, again, because we see that what has happened in Russia owing
to the Bolshevik revolution and in Germany owing to the Nazi revolution, or in Germany
after the expulsion of the Nazis and the Adenauer regime, where the differences were
more important than what was not changed, because the regime decides, if I may now use
our jargon, on the reigning value system, than which nothing is more important. That the
people still use their dialects, and potteries, and folk dances as before, that is ridiculously
unimportant compared with what the whole community is dedicated to, and that depends
on the regime. So Aristotle by no means talks nonsense, but it is nevertheless difficult,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

307

and that shows itself when he speaks of the question, “Who is the good citizen?” And his
official answer, given in the third book of the Politics, is: “What is the good citizen is
relative to the regime,” which today every child can understand. I mean, a good Nazi is
not a good communist and neither is a good liberal democrat. So this shows clearly that a
good citizen is relative to the regime, whereas a good man would be the same regardless
of all changes of regime, and how the good citizen and the good man are related then
becomes a great practical question.
Now in his Constitution of Athens, Aristotle suggests another definition of the good
citizen, namely, a good citizen is a man who serves his country under all regimes. There
was an Athenian on rather friendly terms with Socrates, as tradition has it, Theramenes,
and he was a leading statesman under the democracy, a leading statesman under the
oligarchy, and a leading statesman under the Thirty Tyrants. And so the Athenians called
him the kothornos, or in English—how do you call a man who changes his position?
Student: Chameleon.
LS: No, chameleon was not the word they—but at any rate—
Student: Turncoat.
LS: Turncoat. And Aristotle suggests in this more popular writing: this is a good citizen.
Well, in the more severe Politics, of course, not a word about this lighthearted, if popular
view [LS chuckles]. You know? You can be a collaborator like Quisling;iv that doesn’t do
any harm, provided you take care of the interests of the country. It is in a way a more
humane view, but it is of course also very dangerous. Yes?
Student: I was just thinking of . . . in France, during the twenties and thirties, would be
the type of a man—he was able to serve the far right, the far left, and eventually the
Vichy.
LS: Who?
Same Student: . . .
LS: Balfour, the British?
Same Student: No, he was a Frenchman, and he served in various positions.
LS: Laval would be a good example. Wasn’t Laval his name who was a—?
Same Student: No, there was another.

iv

Vidkun Quisling (1887-1945), head of the government of Norway during the Nazi occupation.,
1940-45. Charged with cooperation with the enemy and with murder, Quislig was found guilty
and executed in 1945.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

308

LS: Well, yes, but the French didn’t have the change of regimes in the twenties and
thirties.
Same Student: But they were—
LS: Yes, that’s different. And then you have to bring in the party system, which was
wholly unknown to Aristotle. It’s a new complication. Yes?
Another Student: I was under the impression that, very simply, Greek law was very
closely bound up with theology and that even in matters of substance a great deal of
divine interpretation [played a part]. Now isn’t Aristotle ignoring some constitutional
traditions here?
LS: Give an example of what he ignores.
Same Student: In the passage that was read before the questions, where he speaks of the
rational and positive principles of law, which to me would seem to ignore the divine
aspects of Greek law.
LS: In a way he does this, but not completely. After all, when he gives his enumeration
of the parts and function which the polis has to fulfill, divine worship is mentioned as a
matter of course.
Same Student: But not worship. I mean that the priestly function and the legislative
function were very closely merged.
LS: Not quite. After all, the legislative assembly was not an assembly of priests. There
were matters, for example, like the question of burial and the question of divine worship,
which were of course decided, you can say, by priestly tradition. But they did not, in
Athens at least, cause political troubles.
Same Student: I’m not suggesting this would be troublesome.
LS: Or were politically relevant.
Same Student: The Greeks did not have any concept of sitting down and producing a
criminal code. What they would do rather would be to look back to their religious
principles.
LS: Yes, well, to the law as it has come [down]—originally an oral law, but then
gradually codified, long before Plato’s and Aristotle’s time, [by] Dracon and Solon and
such people. Good. Let us reread the last point which he made, 1129b17. “So that in one
sense we call justice.”
Reader:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

309

So that in one sense we say just things are things that produce and preserve the happiness,
and the parts of the happiness, of the political community. (1129b17-19)
LS: That is a very important remark with a view to the question which we could not help
raising all the time and to which we did not find hitherto a satisfactory answer: what is
the end which the virtues serve? Now here we have an answer. The end which the moral
virtues serve is the happiness of the political community. Let us say public happiness;
that would seem to be a good answer, and an answer still immediately intelligible, having
been raised to the status of the sole principle by utilitarianism, although there in a special
interpretation . . . We have to see whether this is Aristotle’s final view, whether we can
make public happiness the end which morality is supposed to serve. Now please let us go
on, Mr. Pangle.
Reader:
Andv the law prescribes certain conduct; the conduct of a brave man, for example not to
desert one’s post, not to run away, not to throw down one’s arms; that of a moderatevi
man, for example not to commit adultery or outrage; that of a gentle man, for example
not to strike, not to speak evil; and so with actions exemplifying the rest of the virtues
and vices, commanding these and forbidding those—rightly if the law has been rightly
enacted, not rightly if it has been made at random.
LS: Let us stop here. So Aristotle says here that the law commands the works of all
virtues. And therefore the justice which consists in obeying the law is the universal
virtue, because all virtues are in a way commanded by the law. That is the main point.
But he makes here a qualification which was implied in what he said before. The law
commands all actions of all the virtues, but it does this properly only if it is properly laid
down. And it does it badly if it is made offhand, i.e., by apprentices or other inept people,
which is of course possible. Therefore, since it could very well be done by inept
apprentices, for this reason the just cannot be identical with the legal. Yes?
Reader:
Justice then in this sense is perfect Virtue—
LS: Let us stop here. “Is perfect virtue,” because justice, i.e., obedience to the law in
every respect; and the law commands all actions of all virtues. Therefore obedience to the
law, that is to say justice, is identical with being perfectly virtuous. But then Aristotle
makes a qualification.
Reader:
though not simply, but with regard to others.vii (1129b19-27)

vi

In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
In Rackham’s translation: “though with a qualification, namely that it is displayed toward
others.”
vii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

310

LS: Let us stop here. Here is the difference, and a crucial point. Universal justice is
identical with perfect virtue, with complete virtue, only from a certain point of view,
namely, the point of view of other men or, more generally stated, the polis, because the
polis of course includes me too; but I am always also someone who can doubt whether
the polis is right, who can oppose it, therefore. This means that virtue by itself does not
have this reference to the polis, and that is a very strange implication. Let us first try to
explain what this can mean. Virtue is concerned with the perfection of the individual as
individual. Hence virtue as virtue has no necessary reference to the city or the fatherland.
We have seen this especially in the discussion of courage. Although courage proper has
its place in war, as Aristotle emphasizes, in an activity, that is, that necessarily belongs to
the city, yet no reference to the city or to the fatherland occurs in Aristotle’s discussion of
courage. Now we must try to understand that. We must read a bit more before we can try
to answer that.
Reader:
This is why Justice is often thought to be the chief of the virtues, and more marvelous viii
than the evening or the morning star; and we have the proverb—
In Justice is all Virtue found in sum.
And Justice is perfect virtue because it is the practice of perfect virtue; and perfect in a
special degree—
LS: The more literal translation would be “the use,” “the use of perfect virtue.” Yes?
Reader:
perfect in a special degree, because its possessor can practise his virtue towards others
and not merely by himself; for there are many who can practice virtue in their own
private affairs but cannot do so in their relations with another. (1129b27-1130a1)
LS: I think we need to stop here for a moment. Here he speaks of justice in this universal
sense, in terms of unusually high praise. This justice is the greatest, most embracing of all
the virtues. The praise reminds of the praise of magnanimity which we have seen in book
4. Aristotle seems to agree that this kind of justice, the universal justice, is superior to
magnanimity. This would mean that public happiness is the end of all virtue, which is
something which was in no way suggested in the analysis of magnanimity, as we have
seen. Aristotle could easily have linked up magnanimity with public happiness. I used at
that time the example of Montgomery as a typical magnanimous man, well-known in our
age and therefore useful as an example. Civil society needs men who are born to
command and who know that they are born to command. And Montgomery fulfills both
requirements beautifully. Some might say the second [LS chuckles] perhaps more than
the first, but this would be, I think, quite unfair. And therefore the link with public
happiness is obvious. Aristotle does not even try to do that. Why does he not do that?
And this throws decisive light, it seems to me, on the question of the end of the virtues,
the end which the virtues serve.
viii

In Rackham’s translation: “sublime.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

311

What is public happiness? If public happiness means more or less what Bentham and
other Utilitarians meant by it, namely, proper care for food, housing, roads, and what
have you, that is one view. But this would not be the Aristotelian view. Aristotle would
say: “Well, that belongs to the sphere of mere living, but the purpose of the polis is to live
well, not merely to live.” That is to say, the polis owes its dignity not to the satisfaction of
elementary needs but to the moral tone, to the moral level of the society. Of the moral
tone of the society: that could mean of all of its members, or at any rate, its preponderant
parts, because a preponderant part would give the character of the polis, even as today
people speak of opinion leaders. You must have heard that expression; they are only a
part of the populace, but they lead opinion and therefore they give opinion their character,
and all the more if it is not merely opinion but the whole manner of living which is
decisive. Now if this is so, if the polis cannot be understood in the light of mere living but
only in the light of living well, then virtue cannot be understood in terms of public
happiness, since public happiness itself must be understood in terms of virtue. And
therefore this statement and its implication that universal justice is in the service of public
happiness does not yet make universal justice simply the highest virtue.
And so it remains at the fact that we have in the Ethics two peaks: magnanimity on the
one hand, and justice on the other. And even if we grant, which we may, that universal
justice is a somewhat higher peak than magnanimity, yet magnanimity has a dignity of its
own which cannot be absorbed completely by the dignity of universal justice. Now let us
continue here. We must lead this to a conclusion.
Reader:
This is why we approve the saying of Bias, ‘Ruleix will show a man’; for in rulingx one is
brought into relation with others and becomes a member of a community. (1130a1-2)
LS: Does this saying of Bias and what Aristotle remarks on it remind you of a presentday or modern issue, that rule, office, magistracy will show a man?
Student: Well, Harry Truman.
LS: What did he say?
Another Student: Harry Truman. This is often said about him.
LS: I see. [Laughter] But he didn’t say that. I was reminded of his saying about the
difference between a statesman and a politician. You know that statement? A statesman is
a dead politician. [LS chuckles; laughter.] No, I wasn’t thinking of that, but of Lord
Acton’s famous saying that power corrupts. Aristotle suggests the opposite: not that he
didn’t know that power corrupted sometimes, but power does not necessarily corrupt.
Power is also an opportunity to show off a man’s capacities, of which he wouldn’t have
an opportunity without power.
ix
x

In Rackham’s translation: “Office.”
In Rackham’s translation: “in office.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

312

Student: Acton was somewhat smarter than that statement is often quoted to show. The
actual statement is “power tends to corrupt,” which is a better statement than the other.
LS: That’s true, but Aristotle goes even beyond that. All right, thank you very much.
[Laughter] Now let us go on.
Reader:
The same reason, namely that it involves relationship with someone else, accounts for the
view that Justice alone of the virtues is ‘the good of others,’ because it does what is for
the advantage of another, either a ruler or an associate.
LS: Is this saying known to you? Justice is the foreign good, the good of somebody else.
Student: Thrasymachus.
LS: Thrasymachus, yes. So Aristotle shows that in a way Thrasymachus is right. And
that . . . implications. Yes?
Reader:
As then the worst man is he who practices vice towards his friends as well as in regard to
himself, so the best is not he who practises virtue in regard to himself but he who
practises it towards others; for that is a difficult task.
Justice in this sense then is not a part of Virtue, but the whole of Virtue; and its opposite
Injustice is not a part of Vice but the whole of Vice (the distinction between Virtue and
Justice in this sense being clear from what has been said—
LS: “In this sense belongs to justice.” So it would be better to translate: “How virtue and
this kind of justice differ is manifest from what has been said.” Yes?
Reader:
they are the same but their mode of being is different;xi what as displayed in relation to
others is Justice, as being simply a habitxii of a certain kind is Virtue). (1130a3-13)
LS: Yes. Now here then Aristotle makes clear why he differs from Thrasymachus. This
virtue toward others is more difficult than the virtue which has to do entirely with oneself
and where one is interested immediately, directly in becoming virtuous. And therefore
this kind of justice is not inferior but rather superior to virtue which does not have this
reference to others.
I come back to a question which I have prepared by a previous remark. The two peaks, to
repeat, of Aristotle’s Ethics are universal justice, as discussed here, and magnanimity. Is
this only an interesting document showing us the moral taste of Aristotle, the trait of his
xi
xii

In Rackham’s translation: “they are the same quality of mind, but their essence is different.”
In Rackham’s translation: “disposition.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

313

character, as it were? His private value system? Or is it a problem which every
philosopher worth his salt must face? Now to simplify the matter, let us limit ourselves to
a comparison with Plato. Is there a parallel in Plato to this distinction between
magnanimity and justice, which we find in Aristotle? Well, not in these terms, in the
terms of justice and magnanimity, but in the following manner, especially in the
Republic. There, as you know, the subject is justice. But what does Plato in the Republic
understand by justice? Surely not what Aristotle understands here: universal justice, i.e.,
obeying the law which prescribes the actions of all virtues. Now in the Republic, you will
recall, they find out first what the three other virtues are: courage, wisdom, and
moderation. And they have some difficulties in finding out what justice is. But finally
Socrates guides them to the answer, and what is the answer given? What is justice,
according to the teaching of the Republic?
Student: . . .
LS: Minding its own business. Minding its own business, which is a very loose
definition, which is indicated in the passage: this or something of this kind, it is said, is
justice. I believe it means doing one’s work well. That is justice. Doing one’s work is not
necessarily doing one’s work well, but this we may here disregard. More specifically,
justice according to the Republic regulates the duties of the parts of the polis toward one
another. So the relation of the farmers and craftsman to the soldiers, to the philosophers,
and vice versa; the relation of these parts, this is justice. But what about the relation of
the city toward other cities? After all, can there not be injustice in foreign affairs? Should
Plato have been such a babe in the woods that he did not know that? If he had no
experience of his own, a single reading of a page in Thucydides would have shown him
the problem. Now what does the Republic teach about justice of the city toward other
cities?xiii
Student: A distinction is made between how you should treat Greek cities and how you
should treat barbarians.
LS: Yes, that is indeed a crucial point. But what about the limitations on warfare? What
are they in the case of the Greek cities? What limitations are there in the case of the
Greek cities?
Student: Well, they should not destroy, because they will be friends afterwards, and in
order to have justice they can’t destroy the crops and the homes of the Greek cities . . .
LS: Yes, and no looting and so on. But in the case of the barbarians?
Same Student: [They] do that.
LS: Yes, but do you remember the precise context? Who proposes that?
Student: Glaucon.
xiii

See Plato, Republic 470a-471b.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

314

LS: Glaucon. In other words, that is a kind of bone which Socrates throws to Glaucon,
because otherwise the asceticism that one must behave in war would be too much for this
young and healthy man. And therefore there must be some reconciliation. If it’s a war
with the barbarians, all right, we close our eyes. We cannot understand this so easily; at
least we pretend no longer to be able to understand that. And that is all. Good.
But however this may be, there is something said about the relation of the polis to other
cities. But what about the justice of the individual or of the soul of the individual? It
consists also in ordering the parts of the soul properly. This definition does not include
any reference to the relation to other individuals, which means to say that even according
to the Republic justice is rather the perfection of the individual than social virtue. This is
a very long question. However this may be, the Republic by its whole structure forces us
to make a distinction analogous to the distinction we are forced to make on the basis of
Aristotle’s Ethics between the perfection of the individual as one consideration, and the
social virtue on the other. Although there are all kinds of links between the two things,
the points of view are different and very importantly different. And the reason why they
are important is this: if it is so that by virtue of the highest in him man transcends the city,
then man cannot be fully understood in terms of the city, and therefore in terms of social
virtue. And that is of course what Aristotle and Plato believe. That is, the highest in man
transcends the city and is therefore no longer a social virtue properly understood. And to
this extent, one may say that there is a Platonic analogon to the duality of the peaks in
Aristotle’s Ethics. Now is there any issue you would like to raise at this point? Yes?
Student: Are you suggesting that the peak of magnanimity in a sense transcends the city?
LS: Yes, in a way, because it does not have this reference to the others and to the city.
But this [is] of course not quite so simple, because being concerned with honors, and that
means in the first place honors given by the city, the magnanimous man points of course
to the city. But an indirect proof of what I say you could find in the fact that there have
been some interpreters of the chapter on magnanimity who say [that] Aristotle describes
here the philosopher. Now this can, as a sweeping thesis, easily be refuted, but the men
who made this remark smelled something. The magnanimous man is in between, say, a
figure like Pericles and Socrates. And one could not say the same thing about the just
man as he is defined at the beginning of book 5.
Student: In the Republic when Socrates . . . the city, when he asks Glaucon, I think:
Well, now we have found that we have the three virtues, isn’t it true then that justice . . . I
mean, if we have the first three, justice really won’t be necessary.
LS: Yes, this is one way of putting it; I mean, in other words, if you have the three
others. But that is not the way which is pursued there, because they start from the
distinction between these four virtues. That’s the starting point, and therefore they must
find justice and, as you know, they have great troubles. They think, as Socrates puts it,
that it is lying somewhere in the ground before their feet and that’s the reason why they
can’t find it. But they find it in this somewhat dubious way: a definition of justice is

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17
given which is not a definition, because it leaves undetermined the particular kind of
minding one’s own business which is justice. After all, there can be a way of minding
one’s own business which is very vicious, and therefore the definition given is quite
inadequate. Well, then we will continue and turn to the next chapter.
Reader:
What we are investigating, however, is the Justice which is a part of Virtue, since we
hold—xiv (1130a14-15)

1
2

Deleted “stops now to do.”
Deleted “but.”

xiv

The tape ends at this point.

315

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

316

Session 18: April 22, 1968
Leo Strauss:i Mr. . . . I was pleased with your paper on the whole. ii There are a few
points. You say, referring to Aristotle’s chapter on natural right in the fifth book,
“Aristotle contends that among humans all is subject to change. The differentiating
characteristic of human nature is genesis.” Differentiating from what?
Student: Well, in the terms of that particular sentence, between us and natural . . . or the
gods and . . . natural objects . . . their nature and so on . . .
LS: Well, it is not clear, what you say. I mean, all human things are changeable. What is
not changeable?
Same Student: Well, in that . . . he says that with the gods it might not be and with
natural objects . . . not changeable.
LS: But he doesn’t say that. The point is any right which has to do with the gods is or
may be unchangeable. But no right connected with man can be unchangeable.
There was one more point. “The spoudaios, that is to say the decent man, may never live
in the best politeia, best regime. He can in every regime do the naturally just precisely
because the natural right is that just act chosen by the spoudaios.” Is this so simple? If
what is by nature right is forbidden by the vicious regime, can he do the naturally right
thing there? I mean, well, he can do it at the peril of his life, but that means of course also
that he cannot do it.
Same Student: . . . it seems to me that . . . that would assume precisely what . . . I had
understood that the naturally right or the naturally just thing is . . . it would be something
that . . . it seems that whatever laws or whatever types of action a politeia would forbid,
there would always be a naturally right way that the spoudaios would act.
LS: Sure, that is true. But it would not have sufficient force against the vicious regime.
Same Student: No, that isn’t what I said. I mean, whatever law, whatever particular law
there might not be, I wouldn’t assume that that law could make impossible naturally just
actions, not because whatever the law might be, let’s say the spoudaios could act in—
LS: Yes, but that is the question: whether he could act justly in a very vicious regime.
Think of the case of Socrates under the Thirty, when Socrates was commanded by the
Thirty together with three other Athenians to arrest a perfectly innocent man, Leon of
Salamis. Well? The three others, fearing the power of the regime, arrested Leon. Socrates
did not go there. He couldn’t prevent it. But as Xenophon, who reports this event, says, if
i

The session begins with remarks about ending the next session early so that students can attend a
lecture.
ii
Strauss responds to a student’s paper.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

317

the regime had lasted somewhat longer, they would not have permitted Socrates to
continue with this subversive practice.
Student: No, that’s possible, but I mean, the point is that—well, to use the example that
was used earlier, namely, that of Antigone, it might cost her her life, but she could act in
a naturally just manner like Socrates did, even though it might cost her her life.
LS: Yes, but still there is a certain ambiguity about the word “may.” If you may do
something with the moral certainty that you will be killed for it, you can also say you
may not do it. Good. This is what I meant. Thank you.
And now Mr. . . . if I can read it properly. I was very satisfied with your paper. There are
two points which I would like to mention. “How can we say that a man who dies in battle
for a bad cause is a truly courageous man? How can we possible say that dying for a bad
cause is a noble action? I think that is what Aristotle means, although he does not say it in
so many words. Whether the end of his fighting is truly good or not, meaning whether the
cause for which he fights is a good or bad one, depends on his ruler.” But this is in a way
what Aristotle says, because the decision about the war will not be made by the
individual soldier but by what in modern language we would call the sovereign, be it a
democracy, or an oligarchy, or a monarchy. And therefore Aristotle says somewhere in
the Politics that phronēsis, practical wisdom, on this high political level is the matter of
the actual ruler. Those who do not actually rule can only have right opinion.iii Well, for
example, in the case we have now in regard to Vietnam, Richard Nixon rightly said he
cannot judge of the wisdom of the action because he doesn’t have access to information
available only to President Johnson. You know? That is a complicated [issue]. I think you
understood it on the whole quite well.
Now our Greek friend, whose complicated name I have forgotten, where is he? I saw
him. Oh here—you had a question.
Student: . . . Aristotle’s political philosophy is teleological and . . . so Aristotle, for
instance, starts with . . . in mind.
LS: Yes, one can say that.
Same Student: Hobbes’s political philosophy was not teleological.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: So Hobbes starts . . . about the rights . . . argument for Socratic
position . . . his argument for disagreeing with Aristotle . . . his position? What is his
starting point?
LS: Well, if you start from the teleology, Aristotle was compelled or enabled by his
doctrines to assert that every natural motion is teleological. Therefore the fall of a heavy
iii

Aristotle, Politics 1277b25-29.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

318

body tends to the place, toward the natural place of the heavy body, i.e., the earth. So in
Aristotle everything is teleological. And this became incredible for a variety of reasons,
and today no one entertains the notion that there could be a teleological physics or
chemistry. The [case of] the living body is still not so easy. And in the case of man it is
very hard to abstract from ends. But if we limit ourselves to the argument as it can be
traced within the confines of political philosophy, then we have to go back to
Machiavelli, [where] the issue of teleology and nonteleology is not explicitly discussed
but it comes out in this form: if we accept the Aristotelian or maybe the Platonic view,
then if we regard as the starting point of all political and moral considerations the end of
man, the full duties of man, then we make very high demands on man individually and
collectively, and therefore our politics becomes “quote unrealistic.” And Hobbes
therefore says we must begin in a different way, not with man’s complete duties but
rather with man’s fundamental right, with that right which cannot possibly be denied
without destroying civil society, any civil society, and that is according to Hobbes the
right of self-preservation. And this has this advantage, according to this school: if you
have a doctrine in agreement with this fundamental and massive right which every child
understands, then the chances of the actualization of a civil order built up according to the
right are very great, whereas if you make very high demands, the chances of actualization
are very small. This is the intrapolitical argument of Hobbes and his right against
Aristotle.
But your question, as you stated it to me in my office, went a bit farther than that. By the
way, there is one point which you must not forget. You have in classical antiquity people
who were in no way teleologically oriented—I mean the people loosely called the
sophists—and yet did they have any doctrine of rights of man? Say, men like Protagoras,
Gorgias, Hippias, and so: do we find any doctrines of the rights of man, the rights of man
being prior to the duties of man, as we have it in Hobbes explicitly? No. Because in
classical antiquity the line was very simply drawn: either you accept that there is
something by nature right, [and] then this “by nature” right does not have the character of
rights in contradistinctions to duties,1 [or] you say all right is convention. This was a very
common view among the intellectuals of classical antiquity. But what you find in modern
times, in this epoch, especially in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries with effects up
to the present day, is opposition to conventionalism. There is a natural right, but the
natural right does not have the character of duties but rather of rights. Therefore men can
be depended upon to be interested in it. Men are not so interested, that is the notion, in
fulfilling their duties, but they are greatly interested in getting their rights; and therefore,
if you appeal to the rights, you seem to be much more realistic than the other way around.
And I think even when you look today at the political scene, even when you hear too
many people using moral language, you will see that the appeal is to a considerable
extent to the rights of the people concerned rather than to their duties, although that is in
practice a bit more complicated, as you all are aware. But you had a somewhat broader
question.
Student: No, this . . .
LS: This was what you meant.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

319

Now the section which we are discussing now in the Ethics, and which we read last time,
deals with the difference between universal and particular justice. It was apparently for
the Greeks somewhat difficult to see that justice means on the one hand universal justice,
and on the other hand particular justice, i.e., that there was only a single word available
for two very different things. And Aristotle had to go out of his way to make clear that
this single word means two radically different, although kindred, phenomena. Now we do
not in English or the modern languages have this difficulty. Is this then a purely Greek
idiosyncrasy to have this complication regarding justice, or are we not also faced with the
same kind of problem, although maybe we believe it has been solved? Yes?
Student: It would seem that our solution has been to try to replace universal justice by
particular justice. In other words, whatever can’t be traced to harming someone else in a
very direct sense—having wars or giving them less or something—we try to separate
from the notion of justice altogether. In that way . . . bring the two things together.
LS: By reducing universal to particular justice. And what becomes of the rest of
universal justice?
Same Student: Well, it can sort of—I mean, to a certain extent, I mean, for practical
purposes it gets lost. It’s sometimes called morality, as opposed to—
LS: As opposed to what?
Same Student: Well . . .
LS: You are very hot, but you haven’t used the precise words yet. What has happened,
what has become in modern times of the distinction between universal and particular
justice? Well, universal justice, as Aristotle says, is virtue as a whole, complete virtue, if
from a peculiar point of view, from the point of the view of the other man, [of] what we
owe to the other. So universal justice, in other words, is for all practical purposes the
same as morality. And particular justice seems rather to be the sphere of what? Because
there must be some distinction made.
Same Student: Legal justice.
LS: Yes, but I mean, what is the basis of legal justice, [of] merely positive law? We are
now a bit closer now, I think. The distinction with which Aristotle is concerned is
surviving, if in a hardly recognizable manner, in the distinction with which we all are
familiar between law and morality. We believe somehow that there is a sphere—even if
all law is positive, we have a notion that not all subjects are fit to be regulated by law,
and these other subjects are given over to another province called morality. There is from
Aristotle’s point of view nothing moral which is not a fit subject for legislation, and this,
we can say with minor modification, was the traditional view, in particular also the
Thomistic view. People knew at all times that there are things which are morally wrong
which the legislator does not forbid and punish, because it would be too complicated

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

320

to . . . or because too many would transgress that law and it would not be feasible.
Fornication is Thomas’s example, simple fornication, which means of an unmarried man
and an unmarried woman. And this is morally wrong according to the Thomistic doctrine,
but the legislator doesn’t forbid it because it happens so often, and so on and so on.
Generally speaking, stated in full generality, in practice not all morally wrong things will
be forbidden. But there is no principle which tells us how to draw the line between that
part of morality which can be sanctioned by positive law and that part of morality which
cannot: that depends on the circumstances. But what happened in modern times was this:
that people tried to find a principle which would tell us which part of morality can be
sanctioned by law and which part of morality cannot. And in this respect Hobbes is of
course of very great importance with his doctrine that the natural law is exclusively or at
least primarily concerned with the establishment and preservation of peace, [with
ensuring] that men do not harm or provoke one another to violence or to fraud, and
everything else may be still morally praised or blamed but is not a fit subject for
legislation. We have in our days the well-known question of sexual freedom. Rape of
course would be a crime, but sexual acts committed with the agreement of both parties,
regardless of whether they belong to the same or different sex, that’s their private affair.
No harm or violence is done to anyone. You know this from the daily discussions, and
this has become a part of modern life. Whether things can be maintained as simply as
some assert is of course another question. But . . . this distinction which we have today,
between law here and morality there, is wholly absent from Aristotle [and] is of course
also not wholly maintained in present-day thought. Even the liberal people, as they are
called, who would fully agree with this view regarding sexuality and sexual deviations,
are very much concerned with making morality legally enforced in other fields; for
example, the fight against the war in Vietnam as an immoral war, the fight against the
relics of racial discrimination. Here morality has to take care that the morally correct is to
be established by law. Although the content is different, the principle is the same:
whatever is moral is in principle fit to be made the subject of legislation. This problem is
somehow concealed in the Aristotelian discussion which we have read. Mr. Wedegreen?
Student: As I understand it, the distinction between private and public in Aristotle is
simply a prudential thing. But isn’t that, at least according to common sense, is that really
a . . . the most obvious thing in the world is that there are some personal things.
LS: I don’t understand you. What do you have in mind here?
Same Student: Well, I was thinking, I mean . . . he says that the difference—that no
subject, nothing which has to do with morality is unfit for legislation except given certain
particular circumstances?
LS: Yes, sure, and certain purely expediential grounds, like it’s too complicated to bring
it home, and so forth. You know? Everything morally relevant can be legally enforced.
Yes. I see, what cannot legally be—that is, you identify the distinction between the moral
and legal with that between the private and the public? That is surely not Aristotle.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

321

Same Student: . . .
LS: Not quite. After all, there are many private things subject to legislation. Public things
as well. This, I believe, is not helpful. Or can you support your assertion by some
examples?
Same Student: Well, I mean, if you say the distinction between the legal and the moral is
not simply in modern life the distinction between the public and the private, then—
LS: That I did not say.
Same Student: I think . . . to some extent, although as you point out, it’s a hard
distinction to maintain . . .
LS: Yes, I see, purely private things. But of course this is not unqualifiedly true; for
example, what is going on between two human beings of the same or different sex is not
universally left to the discretion of people according to present or coming law. There is
still an age limit presupposed, you know? In other words, I would like you to make it
clearer than you did hitherto.
Same Student: What about dietary laws in the ancient . . .
LS: There would be no difficulty in principle of having them.
Same Student: No, but I mean, but there were such things . . . laws which force people
to eat certain foods or something like that . . .
LS: Forcing what kind of food? To partake in cannibalistic meals, or what? [Laughter]
Same Student: Well, I thought . . . example, I was just thinking of—that, you know, that
some . . . might be required for . . . these kinds of . . . To me, I mean, I think there’s
nothing more private than eating and I’m just . . . [Laughter]
LS: Yes. But still I think with a little bit of legal experience and dialectical skill one can
easily build up a case for a dietary law from the point of view of health, for example,
making certain assumptions regarding what is healthy or not, which may not be agreed
upon by physicians. Some physicians might agree with them; for example, you can make
a case for vegetarianism, which is clearly—if you have a law establishing vegetarianism,
like you had prohibition, well, you have a dietary law. That’s not so difficult. Yes?
Student: I think I understood that you said that all moral matters could be legislated—
LS: In principle, yes.
Same Student: It seems that that would be only true if all religious matters were of the
same nature as you mentioned last time, as they were in the ancient polis, namely, that

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

322

religious matters were subservient to or in some way regulated by the polis. But if
religion in the form of Christianity is present, that doesn’t seem to be true, that all moral
matters can be legislated upon.
LS: No, and doubtless Christianity played a certain role in bringing about the distinctions
to which we are accustomed. But yet in earlier times, at least, what does this in practice
mean? Not that every Christian can simply disobey the law, except in clear cases like
idolatry, or emperor worship, or this kind of thing, but it led to the fact that there was
another body superimposed on the civil law, called either the divine law or in another
aspect the canon law, and so forth. I mean, that does not necessarily mean that you have
to make a distinction between morality and law in the present-day sense, and a clear
proof is the fact that Thomas Aquinas does not make this distinction.
Same Student: No, but he doesn’t make this distinction precisely because of the . . . polis
and whatever has been relegated to a sort of inferior position in terms of making laws.
LS: Yes, that is true. Yes?
Another Student: . . . the distinction between public and private?
LS: Sure, sure. The distinction between private and public law, for example, comes
directly to us from Roman law, but it goes back to Greek law too. And the distinction
between public and private is quite clear. There is a passage in Plato’s Laws, I think in
the fifth book, when he briefly restates the main thesis of the Republic.iv Then he states
[that] everything must be public, common, koinon (but koinon has also this meaning of
“public”), except what is by nature private. Now what is by nature private, as explained
there, is strictly speaking only the body. And this can empirically be proved very simply.
You may love another man or woman as much as you like; your toothache is your
toothache, and her toothache is hers. You can enter sympathetically, but you do not feel
that you are there too. So in other words, this is the limit to all collectivisation, to all
publication, making-public: the body. That was the Platonic–Aristotelian view.
Student: That is a very . . .
LS: No . . . But it is of some significance. Now the question of course is, granting that
other things are no longer so private as the body is, can these other things not be—is it
not wise to extend the sphere of privacy beyond [the body]? Now Plato makes this
formulation because he had experimented with the notion of the maximum communism
feasible in the Republic—you know, in order to make clear indirectly what the limitations
of such an experiment are. Yes?
Student: . . . statement in the Politics that the public realm is by far the most important
because that’s the place where a man can fulfill . . .

iv

Plato, Laws 739c-d.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

323

LS: Yes, sure. Let me very crudely but not misleadingly state: the sphere of the political,
the common, public; and the sphere of the moral, de jure the same, not de facto, because
of the imperfection of man . . . But still, the same Aristotle says at the beginning of the
Politics: a man who is not political, [who] is unable to participate in civil society, is either
a brute or a god. So this means that the whole moral–political sphere is not the highest
sphere for Aristotle.
Student: . . . midway between—
LS: Yes, well we have seen this from a variety of points of view in this course here, but
there is—the concern with the truth, the quest for the truth, is the most important thing for
Aristotle, and that is in one sense strictly private. Surely Aristotle does not believe that
the philosophers can or should become kings. But the same most private thing is from
another point of view the most public thing, because every polis, every city is a very large
house, you can say, within which people live. And from that point of view, everything
that happens within the polis is private: private to this particular society. There are other
cities outside of it. And the only thing common is the whole, the whole of nature, the
subject of philosophy. Mr. . . .
Student: May I ask a question about particular justice . . .
LS: Yes.
Same Student: Aristotle . . . has said that . . . just acts . . . other forms of . . . an
inappropriate desire for gain makes an act, instead of being cowardice . . . and does that
mean that justice or injustice has to do more with the end of the act than the act
itself . . . Could you take that . . . as an indication that Aristotle . . .
LS: There is a connection, I believe, a close, more visible connection in Aristotle
between justice, both universal and particular, and the end which they serve. But I would
not infer this from the fact to which you referred, namely, that in the case of the unjust
man in the particular sense, the motive is love of gain, whereas in the case of the coward,
the motive is fear. I don’t see how it would follow from that.
Same Student: . . . something that might be a bad example but, the mercenary that does a
seemingly brave act but does it for the sake of gain.
LS: Yes, but still, if you think of such a poor devil, can you call this gain if he earns
money in the only way, or at least the most convenient way, accessible to him, namely,
by becoming a mercenary with a foreign potentate? I think that would be a bit harsh, to
call such men lovers of gain. Do you see that point? I mean, they would use the little bit
of pay which they get for having something to drink and other things now and then, and
surely not to put it in a bank or in a piggy bank.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

324

Same Student: . . . seems that a just act . . . be an unjust act or is associated with other
acts, not actions by themselves. It seems that . . . have more to do with the way in which
those . . .
LS: Yes, but the coward has also an end: preserve dear life by hook and by crook. The
intemperate man has an end: to satisfy all desire, all sensual desire. The main thesis
which you make, I think, is correct: that justice in both its forms is more visibly
connected with the ends that it serves than the other virtues, according to Aristotle. That’s
all I can say. And this can be proven. Good. Now is there any other point you would raise
before we continue? If not, Mr. Pangle will read 1130b6.
Reader:
Thus it is clear that there are more kinds of Justice than one, and that the term has
another meaning besides Virtue as a whole. We have then to ascertain the nature
and attributes of Justice in this special sense.
Now we have distinguished two meanings of ‘the unjust,’ namely the unlawful
and the unfair,v and two meanings of ‘the just,’ namely the lawful and the fair. vi
Injustice then, in the sense previously mentioned, corresponds to the meaning
‘unlawful’; but since the unfair is not the same as the unlawful, but different from
it, and related to it as a part to a whole (for not everything unlawful is unfair,
though everything unfair is unlawful), so also the unjust and Injustice in the
particular sense are not the same as the unjust and Injustice in the universal sense,
but different from them, and related to them as part to whole; for Injustice in this
sense is a part of universal Injustice, and similarly the Justice we are now
considering is a part of universal Justice. We have therefore to discuss Justice and
Injustice, and the just and unjust, in the particular sense.
We may then set aside that Justice which is coextensive with virtue in general,
being the practice of virtue in general towards someone else, and that Injustice
which is the practice of vice in general towards someone else. It is also clear how
we should define what is just and unjust in the corresponding senses. For the
actions that spring from virtue in general are in the main identical with the actions
that are according to law, since the law enjoins conduct displaying the various
particular virtues and forbids conduct displaying the various particular vices. Also
the lawsvii laid down for the education that fits a man for social life are the rules
productive of virtue in general. As for the education— (1130b6-27)
LS: Wait a second here at this point. Now the main thesis is clear: particular justice is
related to universal justice as a part to the whole. It goes without saying that what is true
of particular justice is true also of the other virtues, like courage, temperance, and so on.
They are related to universal justice as parts to the whole. You see only from the

v

In Rackham’s translation: “the unequal or unfair.”
In Rackham’s translation: “the equal or fair.”
vii
In Rackham’s translation: “regulations.”
vi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

325

seemingly needless repetitiousness how difficult it was to see his point, concealed from
the ordinary eye by the ambiguity then existing of the word “justice.”
There is one point toward the end of what you read, about how the most of the legal
things are the same as the things ordered by the whole of virtue. Why does he make this
qualification? How was it in the English translation?
Reader:
For the actions that spring from virtue in general are in the main identical with the actions
that are according to law, since the law—
LS: “In the main.” They are not simply identical. Why not? Yes?
Student: . . .
LS: Surely. That is a great point which Aristotle has in mind. But he doesn’t think of that
here. There are many laws of a purely technical nature; for example, left or right driving
is not demanded by any moral principle, and infinitely many other things. The morally
interesting laws, they are that of which he speaks here. Yes. Now read again the last
sentence. “The things which are productive of the whole virtue.”
Reader:
For the actions that spring from virtue in general are in the main identical with the actions
that are according to law, since the law enjoins conduct displaying the various particular
virtues and forbids conduct displaying the various particular vices. Also the laws viii laid
down for the education that fits a man for social life are the rules productive of virtue in
general. As for the education of the individual as such, that makes a man simply a good
man, the question whether this is the business of Political Science or of some other
science must be determined later: for probably to be a good man ix is not in every case the
same thing as to be a good citizen. (1130b22-29)
LS: And what does he mean by this? So all virtue which has to do with the other, and
therefore with the common, with the public, belongs to the sphere of universal justice.
But this is the subject of legislation. Can legislation, however good, take care of the
whole of virtue? That is the question. And here Aristotle indicates, intimates the principle
which he does not make clear at all. We can state this principle as follows. On the one
hand it is the duty of the legislator to make men good citizens and doers of noble deeds,
as we have heard, but on the other hand it is the education of the individual and not of
platoons, or battalions, or regiments through which a man becomes a simply good man,
so that the most important kind of education may be regulated by the state, but it cannot
be achieved by the state, if we use modern language. But here Aristotle leaves this open,
and he says: is this highest form of education, by which the individual is taken out of the
herd, to use a Platonic expression, and brought up as an individual, is this also a subject,
truly a subject of politics, of political art in the highest and most comprehensive sense?
viii
ix

In Rackham’s translation: “regulations.”
In Rackham’s translation: “for it would seem that to be a good man.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

326

Aristotle says we won’t settle that here, and only that perhaps it is not the same thing to
be a good man and to be a citizen in general. The good man is not simply identical with
the good citizen. Some of you have read the Politics, in which Aristotle discusses this at
great length.x Can you remind us of what you have learned at that occasion?
Student: To be a good citizen one must follow the laws of the polis, and to be a good
man one must be virtuous in a fuller sense; and therefore to be a good man is more
difficult than simply being a good citizen.
LS: Yes, what you say reminds of it, but it’s not precise.
Student: That the regime—the citizens . . . the regime . . .
LS: Is relative to the regime. A good citizen in a democracy is for this very reason a bad
citizen in an oligarchy, and so on and so on. But the good man has no relativity to the
regime. And on the contrary, the regimes, their goodness and badness are determined
with a view to the qualities of the good man. Yes?
Student: In this case, then, wouldn’t you say virtue was aimed at being a good citizen?
LS: No, that would not—because of this relativity, it won’t do.
Same Student: Well, the . . . courage.
LS: Where did he speak of the citizen’s courage in the section on courage?
Same Student: I . . . the word . . . of courage is simply that dying for—
LS: Yes, but can you not answer my question: where did he speak of the citizen’s
courage in the section on courage?
Same Student: . . .
LS: Does anyone else know?
Another Student: It was the first of the forms of pseudo-courage.
LS: Exactly: that is not true courage. And we get now a reason for that: because a citizen
is relative to the regime. And therefore, if you do not know to which regime he belongs,
then it is not true courage.
Student: Then virtue again would require knowledge, to know what is [right].
LS: Then—I didn’t hear you.
x

See Aristotle, Politics 1276b16-1277b32.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

327

Same Student: Does not virtue require true knowledge to know what the right thing is?
LS: Ultimately, yes. In other words, why we will always start in such discussions from
the generally accepted opinions, which we all in a way understand at once. We cannot
leave it at that and we must transcend them; that is what Aristotle does all the time. Good.
And if this is so, if the good man is not identical with the good citizen as such, what
follows from that? That the good man has no relation to the political order, to the regime
at all: is this the Aristotelian conclusion? A private gentleman sitting on his farm,
minding his own business: is this what Aristotle means? Surely not immediately. What he
immediately means in the context of the Politics is this, that the good man is a good
citizen in a particular regime: in the best regime. Number one. And secondly, he must be
the ruler or belong to the ruling body in the best regime, because if he is not actively
engaged in political activity, in ruling, many of his qualities will lie dormant and that will
detract from his goodness. So the good man is a good citizen in the best regime as long as
he fulfills a ruling function. But this is only intimated here and not developed.
It is, however, an indication of the fact that the simple equation of morality and politics is
not feasible. Because of the complication which arises on the political level, it is very
easy to speak of the laws as being in perfect harmony with morality, as Aristotle has here
done a few times, and especially as Socrates does in the Crito, as you will remember, [in]
the eulogy of the laws. But this does not work out because—to take at first Socrates’s
Crito argument: Socrates is absolutely silent about the democratic laws of Athens,
election by lot, of which he surely disapproved. And nevertheless he says: one must obey
the laws. One must obey the laws because—and one reason given, because the laws ask
him: “Did you disapprove of our laws regarding marriage, by virtue of which your father
took your mother for a wife and generated you and then educated you?” Socrates says:
“No, I didn’t.” But the laws wisely do not ask him: “Did you approve of all Athenian
laws?” Because then Socrates would have to make a qualification. That is one of the
intricacies of this particular dialogue. So now let us go on.
Student: Can I ask a question?
LS: Yes, by all means.
Same Student: Regarding your interpretation of 1130b21 . . .
LS: Can you repeat the passage? What does it say?
Same Student: It’s 1130b21: “For practically the majority of the acts commanded by the
law are those which are prescribed from the point of view of virtue taken as a whole.” I
mean, maybe there is a distinction there between the purely technical laws—or did I
misunderstand?
LS: Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

328

Same Student: The purely technical and the nontechnical. Now is there a law by a
legislator which is purely technical, or does he mean here by law all laws, including the
laws of physics?,
LS: No, there are no laws of physics in Aristotle.
Same Student: Well, in the example you used, I believe you said something about
driving. I’m afraid I missed it.
LS: Triangle?
Same Student: Right or left—
LS: Driving. [Laughter] In other words, things not subject to deliberation are not subject
to legislation. The distinction between driving [on the] right and left cannot be legislated
in or out, but driving right and driving left can be legislated.
Same Student: . . . classic distinction between . . . you can say that at least . . . a law of
driving, a traffic law does have an end, which is a moral end.
LS: Yes, but in a remoter way. That is true. But Aristotle must have had a reason for
making this qualifying remark: that not all laws are legislated from the point of view of
virtue. Mr. Zinman?
Student: . . . in the Politics . . . the issue of the relationship between intellectual and
moral virtue. By that I mean, if the good man is the best . . . citizen of the good regime—
of the best regime—and in Aristotle’s best regime the rulers are not philosophers. It
would seem that—
LS: Not philosophers.
Same Student: Not philosophers. It would seem that intellectual virtue and moral virtue
can be separated, in the decisive sense, for Aristotle.
LS: You mean a man can have intellectual virtue of the highest level without moral
virtue? That is a complicated question. People sometimes say Aristotle says so, but there
is no passage in Aristotle in which he says so. But one must assume that Aristotle had a
little bit of common sense, so that even if he doesn’t say a certain thing, if it is
manifestly . . . in mind.
Now let us look at very clever men, whom we find from time to time. I remember, for
example, a case of a man—a very well-known man, of course I would never mention his
name, either in private or in public—who said quite frankly: I cannot philosophize except
in luxury; in luxury, with many secretaries around, and telephones . . . and all that. Well,
one can safely say that Aristotle would not agree with him. In other words, if someone is
interested in the most important subject, he cannot be so interested in luxury. Also one

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

329

can say [that] if a man is in a state of fear all the time, fearing every fly or every mouse,
then he’s incapable2 [of thinking] coherently because there are always possible objects of
apprehension. Yes, and the man who is irascible and gets all the time into scrapes with
[his] fellow man, that has to be deducted from his intellectual activity. We may go
through the whole list of virtues and find that in most cases at least the moral virtues are
indispensable conditions of intellectual virtue.
Same Student: But really the most important question is whether the decisive virtues
for . . . and the decisive virtues seem to be magnanimity and justice.
LS: Magnanimity is not so simple, because a man of theoretical wisdom would be aware
of his worth, and this would somehow show in his bearing. Aristophanes describes how
Socratesxi goes through the streets of Athens in comic exaggeration. But one thing is
clear: here went a man who had a great consciousness of his worth, which is something
akin to magnanimity.
Same Student: I don’t want to say . . . justice, but it would seem that it really is justice in
the sense that—it would seem that the question reduces itself to the question of whether
the philosopher is a perfect gentleman or not.
LS: Yes. Well, if you put it this way: in the ordinary sense he is not, because from the
highest point of view, the perfect gentleman as ordinarily understood can very well look
like a stuffed shirt, if I may say so. You know? And therefore this is an object of great
hilarity also in the Platonic dialogues, and also in other ancient writers, although they
would always fight for the perfect gentleman as the best you can have in the political
arena. You know? But to speak in terms of what is provable and demonstrable or not: my
attention was first drawn to this difficulty by a statement of Thomas Aquinas in his
Theological Summa. I was also brought up, as everybody else, in the view that the moral
virtues aren’t simply and unqualifiedly the conditions of intellectual perfection, and then
I read in St. Thomas that the theoretical virtues, the speculative virtues, do not
presuppose the moral virtues, with the exception of practical wisdom, prudence. xii And
this is clearly what Aristotle teaches in the Ethics: that you cannot become a man of
prudence, of practical wisdom, without becoming at the same time a morally good man.
Otherwise you are only clever, like Alcibiades, for example. [He] was very clever, but he
was not a phronimos, because a sensible man would not do the kinds of things which he
did. You know? When he tried to ridicule the Mysteries, or whatever went with that, he
felt he could afford it and did it. That is not a sensible man. But going back to Thomas: as
for theoretical wisdom, it does not presuppose moral virtue.
Then I began to study Aristotle somewhat more carefully and saw that this is what
Aristotle means. The principle is this: what we call morality, what Aristotle calls the fine
or noble and the just, to kalon kai dikaion, has two ends which it serves. The one end is
the society, or the polis. And very much of the virtues we understand by raising the
question: which purpose of society is served by that? In the case of magnanimity, I gave
xi
xii

Strauss says “Aristotle,” apparently in error.
Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, First Part of the Second Part, Question 58, Article 5.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

330

you the answer: you need generals who have a great confidence in their judgment. And
rightly so. That’s the magnanimous man. And that would also be true 3 [of] non-generals,
men in high office: even if they pretend that they run for office only because they’ve been
drafted, this belongs to the necessary and sometimes charming hypocrisy. But still, if they
don’t have self-confidence, they would be of no great use. So in other words, we can find
the social function of the various virtues without too great difficulties. But this is only
one end. The virtues are also required for another end, for the other end, and that end is
theoretical wisdom. Now what the two ends require, society on the one hand and
theoretical perfection on the other, is not identical but agrees to a considerable extent, so
that the two ends of man demand morality but not in the same way and in the same
respect. And in this sense, one must understand Thomas’s assertion that the intellectual
virtues do not require any morality in the ordinarily understood sense.
So to say, the man who is dedicated to the theoretical life will practice, will lead a rather
ascetic life, one can say, but not on moral grounds, but as Nietzsche once put it in his
somewhat cynical language, like a jockey, who in order to win a race abstains from
alcohol and so on for a certain period of time, not because he thinks this is praiseworthy
in itself but [because it is] practically indispensable if he wants to achieve the result he’s
aiming at. This point of Nietzsche you find in his essay “What Is the Significance of
Ascetic Ideals?,” the third part of the Genealogy of Morals, which gives a brief sketch of
the theoretical ideal of the classical philosophers which, in my opinion, is unsurpassed in
modern times, all the more so since Nietzsche did not identify himself with [the] ancients
but he understood the main point in these matters very well. xiii Yes?
Student: Would the moral man be required, in a regime which was less than best, to
oppose that regime?
LS: Again, to quote Socrates, there is nothing like having another look at it—in this case,
at the text. What does Aristotle say on this subject? Now opposing a regime means, in the
sharpest and clearest case, conspiring against it, trying to depose it. What does Aristotle
say about that? In the Politics he speaks about that occasionally, when he says the men
who have the best reason for rebelling against a bad regime are not the rich, nor the noble
born, nor the many, nor any other kind but the good men, and they are the least [likely] to
think of rebelling. In other words, they would be entitled to do it, but they wouldn’t begin
to do it because—well, we can easily imagine: because they would have to enter all kinds
of alliances because they are too few, and politics make strange bedfellows. And these
allies might give the revolution its color, so that the new regime would perhaps be in
some respects preferable to the past one, but in others it might be inferior. Or as it is put
in the Republic: what the philosopher would do—if the philosopher lives in a bad regime,
then he will behave as we all do, in a way. If there is a very severe rain and we don’t have
an umbrella or anything else with us, we just stay in a doorway or in another place where
we are protected against the rain. This does not appeal to the feelings of many of us. And
I don’t say without qualification that it is a sound view, because given the changeability
of human things, all kinds of courses of action may be good. Philosophers have
sometimes been engaged in conspiracies against tyrants, you know? It all depends. There
xiii

See paragraphs 8-10 in treatise 3 of Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality (1887).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 17

331

are limits to what a man can bear or what he thinks his fellow citizens would bear. That
goes without saying. But in principle this was the answer they gave.
So let us now turn to 1130b30.xiv

1

Deleted “then.”
Deleted “to think.”
3
Deleted “by.”
2

xiv

The tape ends at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

332

Session 19: April 24, 1968
Leo Strauss: Now this was a long interruption, and we must find our way back. We are
now studying the section on justice, book 5. Justice, we may say, is the most political of
the virtues, surely the most immediately political of the virtues. Justice is related to
equality, as Aristotle has stated more than once. And we see this today when the question
of reapportionment is up. One man, one vote: equality. But there is also another side even
to our conception, of the now-prevailing conception of justice: the welfare state. We can
say its principle is “to everyone according to his needs,” i.e., to different people, different
things: inequality. Aristotle makes a similar but not identical distinction. There is a
sphere of equality pure and simple, but there is also a sphere of inequality, only this is not
related to needs: to everyone according to his merits, according to the contribution which
he makes to society. Aristotle implies, in contradistinction to the now-prevailing view,
that society is not responsible for any injustices committed by nature or by the past, but
[that] society must make the best possible use of the available inequalities or differences.
So there is a certain kinship as well as profound antagonism between the view of justice
now prevailing and the Aristotelian view.
Now for a better understanding of Aristotle’s teaching on justice and its political
implications, we must consider a passage in Plato’s Laws. In 756e following, [the
Athenian Stranger]i speaks about the elections to office taking place in the best regime of
the Laws.ii
“The selection of officials will form a mean between a monarchy and a democracy; and
midway between these our regime should always stand.iii For slaves will never be friends
with masters, nor bad men with good, even when they occupy equal positions—for when
equality is given to unequal things, the resultant will be unequal, unless due measure is
applied; and it is because of these two conditions that political organizations are filled
with feuds. There is an old and true saying that ‘equality produces amity,’ which is right
well and fitly spoken; but what the equality is which is capable of doing this is a very
troublesome question, since it is very far from being clear. For there are two kinds of
equality which, though identical in name, are often almost opposites in their practical
results. The one of these any State or lawgiver is competent to apply in the assignment of
honours—namely, the equality determined by measure, weight and number,—by simply
employing the lot to give even results in the distributions; but the truest and best form of
equality is not an easy thing for everyone to discern. It is the judgment of Zeus, and men
it never assists save in small measure, but in so far as it does assist either cities or
individuals, it produces all things good; for it dispenses more to the greater and less to the
i

Strauss says here “Aristotle.”
Plato, Laws 756e-758a. Strauss reads from the English translation of this passage in Plato, Laws,
trans. R. G. Bury (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann,
1961), vol. 1, 411-15.
iii
In Bury’s translation: “The selection of officials that is thus made will form a mean between a
monarchic constitution and a democratic; and midway between these our constitution should
always stand.”
ii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

333

smaller, giving due measure to each according to nature [agreeing with natural
inequalities—LS], and with regard to honours also, by granting the greater to those that
are greater in virtue,iv and the less to those of the opposite character in respect of
goodness and education, it assigns in proportion what is fitting to each. Indeed, it is
precisely this [the second kind of equality—LS] which constitutes for us ‘political
justice,’ which is the object we must strive for, Clinias; this equality is what we must aim
at, now that we are settling the city v that is being planted. And whoever finds a city vi
elsewhere at any time must make this same object the aim of his legislation,—not the
advantage of a few tyrants, or of one, or of some form of democracy, but justice always;
and this consists in what we have just stated, namely, the natural equality given on each
occasion to things unequal. [The natural equality to things unequal is of course
unequal.—LS] None the less, it is necessary for every city at times to employ even this
equality in a modified degree, if it is to avoid involving itself in intestine discord, in one
section or another,—for the reasonable and considerate, wherever employed, is an
infringement of the perfect and exact, as being contrary to strict justice [strict justice is
the one which gives unequal things to unequal people, but this must be diluted for reasons
of peace, internal peace—LS]; for the same reason it is necessary to make use also of the
equality of the lot, on account of the discontent of the many,vii and in doing so to pray,
calling upon the godviii and Good Luck to guide for them the lot aright toward the highest
justice. [In other words, although it is wholly a matter of the lot—of the lot, of whim,
who will be elected, the lot might happen to be favorable to the best men, that of course
can only be achieved by divine intercession and therefore on the human side by prayer.—
LS] Thus it is that necessity compels us to employ both forms of equality; but that form,
which needs good luck, we should employ as seldom as possible.”
This is fundamentally the position of Aristotle as well, although Aristotle’s analysis of
justice is much more detailed. Plato is speaking only of the political functions of the two
kinds of equality, and Aristotle [deals] also with the subpolitical functions, as we have
partly seen and partly will see.
Now I would like to read to you another statement from a famous man and a famous
book, Hobbes’s Leviathan, chapter 15. This is a critique of Aristotle, as you will see
immediately.
“Justice of Actions, is by Writers divided into Commutative, and Distributive: and the
former they say consisteth in proportion Arithmeticall; the latter in proportion
Geometricall. Commutative therefore, they place in the equality of value of the things
contracted for; And Distributive, in the distribution of equall benefit, to men of equall
merit. [And now comes Hobbes’s criticism.—LS] As if it were Injustice to sell dearer
than we buy; or to give more to a man than he merits. The value of all things contracted
for, is measured by the Appetite of the Contractors: and therefore the just value, is that
iv

In Bury’s translation: “greater in goodness.”
In Bury’s translation: “State.”
vi
In Bury’s translation: “State.”
vii
In Bury’s translation: “of the masses.”
viii
In Bury’s translation: “calling upon God.”
v

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

334

which they be contented to give. [In other words, there is no just price, no intrinsically
just price but what they happen to agree upon, and in times of the buyer’s market it is
different than in the times of the seller’s market.—LS] And Merit (besides that which is
by Covenant, where the performance on one part, meriteth the performance of the other
part, and falls under Justice Commutative, not Distributive,) is not due by justice; but is
rewarded of Grace only. And therefore this distinction, in the sense wherein it useth to be
expounded, is not right. To speak properly, Commutative Justice, is the Justice of a
Contractor; that is, a performance of Covenant, in Buying, and Selling; Hiring, and
Letting to hire; Lending, and Borrowing; Exchanging, Bartering, and other acts of
Contract.”ix
So this is one milestone in the change in the notion of justice which eventually led to the
view now prevailing. Now there is one more classic text which one would have to
consider in this connection, and that is at the end of Rousseau’s Discourse on the Origin
of Inequality, in the last note. In the last note Rousseau attacks the notion of distributive
justice, i.e., the justice which gives unequal things to unequal people, and that is of course
connected with the fundamentally democratic view. What happens then to the need for
unequal men, which democracy has as much as any other [regime], is then less clear.
There was a time when Henry Wallace was one of the luminaries of the American
political scene, and his key word, as the older ones of you may remember, was “the
common man.” But his biographer entitled his book, Henry Wallace, An Uncommon
Man.x So, I mean, however much you may be in favor of the common man, uncommon
men are needed; and therefore there is also a need for different treatment of the
uncommon man on the one hand, and the common [man] on the other: in the old
language, distributive justice. Good. This may suffice as a reminder.
Now we have first (here we cannot repeat this any more) Aristotle’s distinction between
particular and universal justice, and we limit ourselves from now on entirely to particular
justice. Particular justice is distributive or commutative, and distributive justice leads to
proportional equality and commutative justice to simple or arithmetical equality. Aristotle
speaks of geometric proportion and arithmetic proportion. What he means is this: in an
arithmetic proportion, say, 6 is the mean between 8 and 4, but 8 to 6 is not equal to 6 to 4.
In other words, there are different proportions in the two cases. Properly proportional is a
geometric proportion, where the proportions of the two parts are the same. The quantities
are not the same. For example, 6 is the geometrical mean between 9 and 4, for 9 to 6 [is]
equal to 6 to 4, but the parts are obviously unequal. We came more or less to this point
last time, and we should continue in 1131b24.
Reader:
The remaining kind is Corrective Justice, which appearsxi in private transactions, both
voluntary and involuntary. This justice is of a different sort from the preceding. For
justice in distributing common property always conforms with the proportion we have
ix

Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (1651), part 1, chapter 15.
Frank Kingdon, An Uncommon Man: Henry Wallace and 60 Million Jobs (New York: The
Reader’s Press, 1944).
xi
In Rackham’s translation: “operates.”
x

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

335

described (since when a distribution is made from the common stock, it will follow the
same ratio as that between the amounts which the several persons have contributed to the
common stock)—
LS: In other words, this would also apply to distribution (say, of the dividends of a
shareholding group), because different contributors, people who contributed different
amounts, different percentages, would get different dividends, not identical. But the chief
sphere of distributive justice is of course the distribution of honors. The community. Yes?
Reader:
and the injustice opposed to justice of this kind is a violation of this proportion. But the
just in private transactions, although it is the equal in a sense (and the unjust the unequal),
is not the equal according to geometrical but according to arithmetical proportion. For it
makes no difference whether a good man has defrauded a bad man or a bad one a good
one, nor whether it is a good or a bad man that has committed adultery; the law looks
only at the difference of the damage, xii treating the parties as equal, and merely asking
whether one has done and the other suffered injustice, whether one inflicted and the other
has sustained damage. (1131b24-1132a6)
LS: Let us stop here perhaps for a moment. Now what do you say to this example which
he gives here? It doesn’t make any difference whether it was an honorable man who
committed the crimes here mentioned, or a dishonorable one. Yes?
Student: Well, it is strange that he should even talk about an honorable man committing
a crime.
LS: Yes, sure. After what we have heard, that he would never make a mistake, even
against conventional right, how could he do such horrid things? This is indeed quite
extraordinary. And to make it quite clear, let us turn to 1128b21. “It is not a matter of an
honorable man—shame is not a matter of an—”
Reader:
For indeed the virtuous man does not feel shame, if shame is the feeling caused by base
actions; since one ought not to do base actions (the distinction between acts really
shameful and those reputed to be so is immaterial, since one ought not to do either), and
so one never ought to feel shame. (1128b21-25)
LS: The clear implication is that the virtuous man never will commit any impropriety,
even merely conventional impropriety, let alone improprieties of this magnitude. Now the
commentator (and I suppose he is not the only one who says this)1 [gives the following
explanation]: Aristotle follows here, in the passage just read, Attic law. But what do you
say to this comment? I mean, can a man like Aristotle follow Attic law? He speaks of
justice as justice, and not of any local use which may be very unjust and unreasonable. At
least in order to make this commentary, one would first have to show that there is a
difference between, say, the moral and the legal approach. And once this difference is
xii

In Rackham’s translation: “nature of the damage.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

336

granted, one could conceivably accept a distinction made by one particular positive law,
but there is no place for that distinction in Aristotle, as we have seen. I mean, as a crude
practical distinction, yes, but not as a distinction of principle. The utmost one could say is
this. This fact, that in law—say, in the case of a crime—the moral qualities of the
criminal are not considered is a crude abstraction. [It is] useful for certain practical
purposes but [shows] at the same time how true it is, what Aristotle intimated at the
beginning of the discussion of justice: that the just and the legal are not identical. The law
follows certain conveniences which may be sound and which may be unsound. But these
conveniences are not the same thing as considerations of justice strictly speaking.
At any rate, the difference between the two kinds of particular justice, distributive and
commutative, makes clear the crudity of the simple egalitarian kind, and this crudity is
precisely shown in this example. It doesn’t make any difference what kind of a man
committed a crime. We would say perhaps [that] the virtuous man should be punished
more severely than the habitually vicious man because it is a much more disquieting
thing if a pillar of society misbehaves than if some bum [does]. Or one could perhaps also
say that the pillar of society should be treated less severely because the temptation in his
case must have been much more than flesh and blood could bear, and therefore one
should be understanding in this thing.
At any rate, we would be compelled to raise the question which Aristotle does not raise
here: what is the purpose of punishment? We have seen that Aristotle in this work rarely
raises the question of the purpose of the various virtues. For Plato, the question of the
purpose of punishment is very important and frequently discussed, especially in the Laws
but also in other works. Now we might perhaps throw a glance at the Platonic doctrine,
and this may help us toward a better understanding of Aristotle. According to the Platonic
view, the only sane and rational purpose of punishment is betterment: not mere
retribution, tit for tat, but betterment. This is a view now of course very well known,
although the term is probably rather “rehabilitation” than betterment, but I think
fundamentally it means still betterment.
But this leads to difficulties to which Plato draws our attention in his way. Plato takes it
for granted that there are people who cannot be bettered (which is denied more or less by
the now-prevailing view), and Plato has a very simple recipe: people who are incorrigible
must be exiled or destroyed, because there is nothing which can be done in their case. But
here we may think of this: a man, a poor fellow and a stupid fellow who commits a petty
theft. Well, he will be examined by the authorities: is he corrigible or is he not corrigible?
One will perhaps wait and say: All right, he gets a year in jail, and afterwards let’s see
how he’ll behave. Next day, after he is out of jail, he commits another act of petty theft.
Now this time he will be punished more severely, I suppose. But after some years, say,
after ten years, even the mildest judges will feel he cannot be bettered. Then he must be
killed, according to the sensible rule: betterment or, where betterment is impossible,
destruction. But then we look at another case: a man who committed murder; and the
close examination of the man by the best psychologists available, say, Socrates or Plato,
leads to the conclusion that this man would never again commit another murder. Think of
Raskolnikov, who learned the lesson that it is absolutely impossible to commit a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

337

murder.xiii Then would it not be sensible in this case to let him free after he has gone
through this experience that murder is a humanly impossible action, whereas the habitual
petty thief would have to be destroyed? Now we see then by thinking this through, there
is obviously another consideration involved apart from betterment or non-betterment, and
that is the gravity of the crime. Murder is a graver crime than petty theft; and we must
have a scale then. This is an entirely different consideration and has nothing to do with
the moral question taken in itself.
These difficulties, which Aristotle does not discuss, make it intelligible why Aristotle
falls back eventually on something like retribution as good for its own sake without any
regard to betterment or any other purpose which punishment serves. So in other words,
Aristotle does answer eventually the question of the purpose of punishment, but he does
not give the simple, most plausible, and seemingly most humane answer preferred
apparently by Plato: that the purpose of punishment is betterment. So now let us go on,
unless someone would like to discuss this point. Yes?
Student: . . . inadequate reason for revising our—for introducing the notion of retribution
that in some cases we might . . . theft . . . might we not simply rethink . . . assumption.
LS: Yes, by all means. But the question is whether retribution as such, i.e., a certain
harmony between punishment and crime, is not indispensable. That is the question, you
see, and not merely the state of mind or character of the criminal. The starting point of
Aristotle here of course is this: that in punitive justice we abstract. We have the principle
(at least in earlier times we had the principle): for the same crime, the same punishment.
Whether the criminal is rich or poor, noble or . . . or whatever it may be.
Student: By retribution . . . do you mean something like Plato points to in the Gorgias
when he describes the woodsman cutting into the laws and then justice marking the soul
of the criminal with the punishment? Is this what you mean by . . . I remember
the . . . about the particular passage about woodsman cutting into the laws and then about
the justice . . . the judge cutting into the soul with justice and implanting justice just as
the mark . . . in the wood.
LS: Yes, but still this is not helpful enough, because the question is: how does the
punishment make the criminal better? This is a simile which is not sufficiently clear for
our purpose, for answering this question. Mr. . . . ?
Student: Does not the difference between punishment as betterment and punishment as
retribution derive in turn from how one conceives . . . whether it’s personal or political—
if it’s for the judgment of the criminal, or in some sense for the protection of the citizens.
LS: I believe this is true. That is also in itself a rational or reasonable notion, that one
must protect society against a criminal. But this is not exhaustive. The key difference is
the one which I stated, as will appear later from the Aristotelian text, when he takes up
the question of whether justice is retribution or not or retaliation or not. Yes?
xiii

The protagonist of Fyodor Dostoevksy’s novel Crime and Punishment (1866).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

338

Student: . . . any reason for it not being retributive except that retribution in
itself . . . more fundamental . . .
LS: Well, we can perhaps say that in the last century or so, the simply retributive notion
of punishment has lost almost all the power that it possessed in former times. So today
the only reason which would be admitted would be betterment and protection, but not
retribution proper. Is this not a fair statement of the present state of discussion? Aristotle
seems to take the view that the core, as it were, of punishment is retribution. He devotes
only one line to it, and we will come to it later. Let us go on then.
Reader:
Hence the unjust being here the unequal, the judge endeavours to equalize it: inasmuch as
when one man has received and the other has inflicted a blow, or one has killed and the
other been killed, the line representing the suffering and doing of the deed is divided into
unequal parts, but the judge endeavours to make them equal by the penalty or loss he
imposes, taking away the gain. (For the term ‘gain’ is used in a general way to apply to
such cases, even though it is not strictly appropriate to some of them, for example to a
person who strikes another, nor is ‘loss’ appropriate to the victim in this case; but at all
events the results are called ‘loss’ and ‘gain’ respectively when the amount of the damage
sustained comes to be estimated.) Thus, while the equal is a mean between more and less,
gain and loss are at once both more and less in contrary ways, more good and less evil
being gain and more evil and less good loss; and as the equal, which we pronounce to be
just, is, as we said a mean between them, it follows that Justice in Rectification will be
the mean between loss and gain. (1132a6-19)
LS: What Aristotle is here driving at is to explain why he brings commutative justice in
the narrower sense, the justice in exchange of goods and services, under the same heading
as punitive justice, and therefore he construes crime in the following sense. A man hits
another. He has a gain—this is the superiority of A, who hit B—and therefore the judge
must equalize the situation by giving B recompense for that harm he has suffered. Just as
in exchange, in buying and selling and so on, there should be equality of the merchandise
and the price, or in exchange, simply what is offered by A to what is offered by B. Here
in both cases, in the case of exchange as well as punishment, simple equality
is . . . whereas in distributive justice proportional equality. We must never forget this
whole context. Yes?
Student: This is a question referring to retribution again. I was wondering if perhaps the
reason why retribution might play a more important role for Aristotle at this point in the
Ethics—would it be because the importance that he placed on honor . . . since we haven’t
got to the part of the contemplative life . . . in the dialogue there isn’t—or at least there
isn’t so much attention paid to honor but if honor is so important, retribution becomes
much more significant. Would that be a possible reason why . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

339

LS: Yes and no. No to the particular point, but the general point: since Aristotle argues
on a lower level than Plato does in the Republic, both honor becomes more important and
the simple notions like retribution become more important. In this way, I would agree.
Student: It seems, for example, that the philosophers wouldn’t mind so . . . because they
are not concerned with the type of honor that—
LS: Yes, sure. And he would have no desire to give tit for tat. Sure. In this sense that is
correct. Yes. Now shall we go on, then? I think we can perhaps skip a section and turn to
1132b11. Will you tell, please?
Reader: That’s on page 279, the top of Loeb.
The terms lost and gained in these cases are borrowed from the operations of voluntary
exchange. (1132b11-13)
LS: In other words, Aristotle knows it is somewhat inappropriate to say [that] if a man
killed another man or hit him, he had a gain and the other suffered a loss and the two
must be equalized. Yes?
Reader:
There, to have more than one’s own is called gaining, and to have less than one had at the
outset is called losing, as for instance in buying and selling, and in all other transactions
sanctioned by law; while if the result of the transaction is neither an increase nor a
decrease, but exactly what the parties had of themselves, they say they ‘have their own,’
and have neither lost nor gained. Hence Justice in involuntary transactions is a mean
between gain and loss in a sense: it is to have after the transaction an amount equal to the
amount one had before it. (1132b13-20)
LS: Yes. This is his general analysis of justice. There is a starting point, or starting
situation. This starting situation is disturbed by some action, say, that I hand over some
money to someone else, or that I hit him. The starting situation is disturbed, and what is
necessary is to restore it. In the case of the money, I get merchandise, so I am as rich as I
was before. In the case of my hitting, I have a gain and I must suffer a loss, namely, go to
jail or pay a fine, or whatever the case may be, and then again the starting situation is
restored. What Aristotle presupposes of course, although that of course doesn’t mean to
exclude reflection, is that the starting situation was just, and therefore the disturbance
brings in an element of injustice and restoration is therefore necessary. And we can say
all the criticisms of our society as a whole, especially the Marxist criticism, imply, and
not only imply, that the starting situation is unjust, and therefore reflections of this kind
are of no serious interest. You want to say something?
Student: In a situation of murder, how can it . . . be restored?
LS: Well, [the murderer will] either be beheaded or strangled, or whatever the procedure
will be.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

340

Student: That doesn’t make it just to the man who is already murdered.
LS: Still, first we were both alive, and then I killed him: there is inequality. Now then,
when I will be strangled, we are both dead: equality.
Student: But this is equality only for those who are left behind, I mean, for society . . .
LS: Still, there is equality. Do you see the point, that there is equality restored? Or take
another case: I stole fifty dollars and I will be fined, and not only to restore the fifty
dollars but also for the trouble and heart-burning I caused to the other man. And again:
equality. Yes?
Student: I have a question concerning equity. Equity is concerned with
merely . . . individual . . . Men and women demand . . . rich . . . to apply justice in the
absolute sense to the individual’s case that the law doesn’t cover—wouldn’t that demand
knowledge above and beyond . . .
LS: Aristotle has a chapter on equity later, and according to him equity is the corrective
of positive law. The positive law cannot in all cases be just, and equity is an attempt to
correct the positive law in the direction of justice, but always on the basis of positive law.
Therefore the equitable judgment is not necessarily simply just, it is only the kind of
justice you can get within this particular legal system.
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, to say nothing of this, surely. This is Aristotle. Yes?
Student: When you spoke about the starting situation, did Aristotle imply that everything
in the cosmos is just when it is in its proper place?
LS: Yes.
Student: What type of things are capable of disobedience, and why? In other words, are
things in the natural world capable of injustice? If not . . .
LS: Aristotle would regard this as metaphoric language and reject it. But some other
thinkers—for example, Plato and some pre-Socratic philosophers—did not hesitate to
speak in such cases of injustice. Aristotle would not do that. But he would say of course
that the heavenly bodies and their motions: perfect regularity, unchangeable; whereas all
terrestrial beings: all kinds of disorder are possible there. But there is a tendency in these
things, the terrestrial things, toward the state of order: the heavy things tend toward the
center of the earth, the light things tend to rise. But you see Aristotle does not use this
comparison, but there is a certain similarity in spirit between what he thinks about justice
and what he thinks about the natural things.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

341

Student: What it is about men that disposes them particularly towards unjust acts? Is it
bad reasoning, or not performing their work properly?
LS: Man is a very complicated being, I would say. You only have to—his latitude is so
much greater than that of a dog or any other animal; and therefore dogs lead more or less
similar lives. Well, here of course the question of upbringing comes in too in the case of a
dog, but on the whole the latitude within which dogs move is much smaller than [that] in
which human beings move. Man is meant to live the life of contemplation, but on the
basis of a very heavy mass (the body) and the desires (partly necessary, partly
unnecessary) which originate in the body, and therefore the success is limited to a few
cases. Man’s nature is enslaved in many ways, as Aristotle puts it, and that makes sense.
The disproportion between the highest in man and men in general is much greater than
any disproportion you might find in any other species of animal, and that explains it, in
his view. Yes. Now we come to the section on retaliation in the next section.
Reader:
The view is also held by some that simple Reciprocity is Justice. This was the doctrine of
the Pythagoreans, who defined the just simply as ‘suffering reciprocally with one
another.’
LS: Yes. We can simply say: tit for tat. If there is simple agreement between what a man
did and what he suffered. Yes?
Reader:
Reciprocity however does not coincide either with Distributive or with Corrective justice
(although people mean to identify it with the latter, when they quote the rule of
Rhadamanthys—
An a man suffer even that which he did,
Right justice will be done).
For in many cases Reciprocity is at variance with Justice: for example, if an officer
strikes a man, it is wrong for the man to strike him back; and if a man strikes an officer, it
is not enough for the officer to strike him, but he ought to be punished as well. Again, it
makes a great difference whether the act was voluntary or involuntary.xiv (1132b21-31)
LS: Now let us stop here for a moment. So that this simplistic Pythagorean notion of tit
for tat is inadequate is clear in the case of distributive justice, where there is proportionate
equality and not simple equality, but what about corrective justice, punitive justice? Is
there not a simple equality, as Aristotle puts it? Regardless of whether the man was
honorable or base, he gets the same punishment. Is this not simple equality? Say, murder:
execution; theft, say: two years of jail. Simple equality. But Aristotle denies it, and he
proves here why this is wrong, because we must make a distinction: when the magistrate
strikes, of course in his function as magistrate, then you can’t hit him back, but not the
xiv

In Rackham’s translation: “whether an act was done with or without the consent of the other
party.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

342

other way around. Here you see [that] inequalities are considered by corrective justice. So
where then do we find tit for tat? Let’s see.
Reader:
But in the interchange of services Justice in the form of Reciprocity is the bond that
maintains the association: reciprocity, that is, on the basis of proportion, not on the basis
of equality. The very existence of the state depends on proportionate reciprocity—
LS: Let us consider that. So the proper sphere of retaliation, i.e., of simple equality, is the
exchange of things: commutative justice, narrowly understood. Yes. And this kind of tit
for tat is a bond; in a way the bond of the city. Namely, why? He gives the reason.
Reader:
for men demand that they shall be able to requite evil with evil—if they cannot, they feel
they are in the position of slaves—and to repay good with good—
LS: Let us stop here. So this is the reason. This is the reason for retribution: men regard it
as a state of slavery if they cannot inflict evil for evil. That is the only statement Aristotle
makes on the subject. This is taken as something undeniable and must be accepted as the
basis of criminal law. One can perhaps state it as follows, what Aristotle means: the pain
of the loss suffered must be requited by the pleasure of the loss inflicted on the other
fellow. This view is stated quite clearly by Hugo Grotius in his great work on the Right of
War and Peace. I forgot to look it up, the exact reference, but you can easily find it.
There is a very long chapter on punishment, and you would easily find this particular
paragraph.xv This seems to be the Aristotelian view. Yes, and the same is also to be true
of the other side: to inflict, to do good for good has the same kind of necessity, and men
desire that, and they feel miserable if they cannot do it. Yes?
Reader:
and to repay good with good—failing which, no exchange takes place, and it is exchange
that binds them together. This is why we set up a shrine of the Graces in a public place, to
remind men to return a kindness; for that is a special characteristic of grace, since it is a
duty not only to repay a service done one, but another time to take the initiative in doing
a service oneself. (1132b31-1133a5)
LS: Even to begin with that. Yes. Now go on.
Reader:
Now proportionate requital is affected by diagonal conjunction. For example, let A be a
builder, B a shoemaker, C a house, and D a shoe. It is required that the builder shall
receive from the shoemaker a portion of the product of his labour, and give him a portion
of the product of his own. Now if proportionate equality between the products be first
established, and then reciprocation take place, the requirement indicated will have been
achieved; but if this is not done, the bargain is not equal, and intercourse does not
xv

See the discussion in Hugo Grotius, “On Punishments,” in De jure belli ac pacis libri tres,
book 2, chapter 20.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

343

continue. For it may happen that the product of one of the parties is worth more than that
of the other, and in that case therefore they have to be equalized.
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. What does Aristotle mean by that diagonal
conjunction? It is very easy to show this at the blackboard. [LS writes on the blackboard.]
That is here the housebuilder, and he builds a house. And here we have the shoemaker; he
makes shoes. So the diagonal conjunction is this: the housebuilder gets the shoes, and the
shoemaker gets a house, and so both parties are satisfied. The housebuilder can build a
house for himself; he doesn’t need anybody else for that. But he cannot make the shoes;
he needs somebody else. And the same applies to the shoemaker, or for that matter,
applies to the farmer. This is what he means by diagonal conjunction. Yes?
Student: May I ask a question?
LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: Is the relationship between houses and shoes so that so many shoes are
worth so many houses—
LS: Let us say one house. Let us be realistic.
Student: . . . imply a relationship between the housebuilder and the
shoebuilder . . . similar things? That is to say, is the fact that a hundred pairs of shoes are
worth one house not simply because a hundred pairs of shoes are worth one house, but
because what the shoemaker will get for his house . . .
LS: Yes, only Aristotle doesn’t start from the money angle. He starts the other way
around. He brings in the money as a means to make incommensurable things
commensurable. I mean, it is clear that a house is more valuable than a pair of shoes,
other things being equal, because . . . a house is worth less than a certain pair of shoes.
But I said other things being equal. But they are entirely different things, and there is no
natural commensurability between them. How do we know how many pairs of shoes are
equal to a house? And there is where money comes in. Aristotle will explain this in the
immediate sequel. Yes?
Reader:
This holds good with the other arts as well; for they would have passed out of existence if
the active element did not produce, and did not receive the equivalent in quantity and
quality of what the passive element receives. For an association for interchange of
services is not formed between two physicians, but between a physician and a farmer, and
generally between persons who are different, and who may be unequal, though in that
case they have to be equalized. (1133a5-18)
LS: I think one should not say merely “may be” unequal but “are” unequal. And this is
the problem. There is no common denominator, primarily; and therefore how can there be

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

344

justice if there is no way to discover an equality here? This question will be answered by
Aristotle in the sequel.
Reader:
Hence all commodities exchanged must be able to be compared in some way. It is to
meet this requirement that men have introduced money; money constitutes in a manner a
middle term, for it is a measure of all things, and so of their superior or inferior value,
that is to say, how many shoes are equivalent to a house or to a given quantity of food. As
therefore a builder is to a shoemaker, so must such and such a number of shoes be to a
house [or to a given quantity of food]xvi—
LS: This is the diagonal conjunction of which he spoke.
Reader:
for without this reciprocal proportion, there can be no exchange and no association; and it
cannot be secured unless the commodities in question be equal in a sense.
LS: Here we have an amazingly explicit statement about the purpose of a virtue.
Exchange, association, [and] community are obviously needed, but they would not be
forthcoming if there were no equality available there, say, as between the physician and
the farmer, the services of the physician and the goods brought to town by the farmer.
And therefore this is obviously rational. We have here an end. We have seen how rarely
Aristotle speaks of the end. But in this case, the most massive case of commutative
justice, perhaps the most simple case, he does speak of that purpose. Yes?
Reader:
It is therefore necessary that all commodities shall be measured by some one standard, as
was said before. And this standard is in truthxvii demand, which is what holds everything
together, since if men cease to have want or if their wants alter, exchange will go on no
longer, or will be on different lines.
LS: So the shoes and the house are qualitatively different; are not exchangeable. They
become exchangeable on the basis of a third [thing] which is present in the two cases.
And that third is “want,” and that brings about equality. Now go on.
Reader:
But demand has come to be conventionally represented by money; this is why money is
called nomisma (customary currency), because it does not exist by nature but by custom
(nomos), and can be altered and rendered useless at will. (1133a19-31)
LS: So money is conventional, obviously: dollars, pounds, and so on. You can do it this
way or that way, it doesn’t make any difference. Money is essentially conventional. The
reason for that is [that] there cannot be a natural currency; and the reason for that is that
there is no natural equality: the equality must be brought about by human fiat. This fact
xvi
xvii

Brackets are Rackham’s.
In Rackham’s translation: “in reality.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

345

that equality must be brought about is rooted in human nature, in human wants. But this
does not make the product of that human action, namely, the introduction of money, in
itself a natural thing. What is natural here is unequal, as he had said in a18, in the passage
which we just discussed before. Yes. Now let us go on.
Reader:
There will therefore be reciprocal proportion when the products have been equated, so
that as farmer is to shoemaker, so may the shoemaker’s product be to the farmer’s
product. And when they exchange their products they must reduce them to the form of a
proportion, otherwise one of the two extremes will have both the excesses; whereas when
they have their own, they then are equal, and can form an association together, because
equality in this sense can be established in their case (farmer A, food C, shoemaker B,
shoemaker’s product equalized D); whereas if it were impossible for reciprocal
proportion to be effected in this way, there could be no association between them.
That it is demand which, by serving as a single standard, holds such an association
together, is shown by the fact that, when there is no demand for mutual service on the
part of both or at least of one of the parties, no exchange takes place between them [as
when someone needs something that one has oneself, for instance, the state offering a
license to export corn in exchange for wine].xviii (1133a31-b10)
LS: Yes, this is a somewhat dubious passage. Now only as long as the demand is actual
are these men potential partners and is there therefore equality. If the demand does not
exist, [there is] no possibility of exchange. Yes?
Student: At the beginning of this passage he said that there had to be a proportion, so
that as the farmer is to the shoemaker, the [farmer’s] product . . . the shoe. Does that
imply that there is a consideration here of the men involved, and that the farmer is either
higher or lower than—?
LS: No, Aristotle does not develop that, but for example, Thomas Aquinas explains it by
a consideration not of the men involved but of the expense incurred and the labor, so that
expense plus labor must be the same on both sides.xix That is not a labor theory of value
because the expense is a separate fact. 2 [It is] not reduced in its turn to labor, as it is in the
Marxist doctrine. Yes?
Another Student: Isn’t it somewhat curious that this discussion is taking place in this
political book, in that by the very nature of the discussion it seems to be eminently
unpolitical, and the type of community with which it deals is held together by standards
of justice . . . held together by almost . . . base . . .
LS: Well, they are low, you can say, but they are not despicable, are they?

xviii
xix

Brackets are Rackham’s.
See Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §980-983.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

346

Same Student: But, I mean, in terms of the politics, for example, we would—I mean, I
would expect this part of the book to be least understandable. I mean, I think it is a
subject really not even worthy of politics.
LS: Oh no, I think that is somewhat—well, if I did not know you so well, I would say
this is snobbish.
Same Student: No, no, I am saying that it seems from the understanding of the political
community . . . that these things are somehow not really—
LS: But let us take the most aristocratic position. Do you expect the gentlemen to make
their own shoes, or to have their shoes made at home by incompetent slaves rather than
by very competent shoe makers in their workshops? If that is so, if there must be division
of labor precisely in an aristocratic society, then there must also be ways3 [and] means in
that society as to make it worth the while of both sides in the exchange to make the
exchange, meaning there must be . . . so a gentleman, say, the gentleman farmer has sold
his oil or figs or whatever he produces, and with that produce . . . he will pay the
shoemakers, the carpenters, and so on and so on.
Same Student: Well, I guess the reason I—my impression is that the parts of this book
on justice which are, it seems that—I mean, I would think most relevant to the political
community, for example, the chapters on equity and natural justice and on that type of
justice which deals with the exchange of honors are actually those parts that seem to be
treat [their subject matters] in a more cursory manner.
LS: But perhaps there was the greatest confusion about this lower kind of
justice . . . Aristotle has to dirty his hands and go into that . . . before, Aristotle . . . after.
Same Student: But if that’s true, why would he—I mean . . . that the area where the most
confusion is is precisely in the areas where he writes off one sentence, for example, the
part about natural justice . . . political justice.
LS: Yes, but let me then state it somewhat differently. Precisely because Aristotle
regards the strictly egalitarian form of justice as the lower, he must bring out its
character, its sphere, its limits. And that he does here.
Same Student: Well, again, I mean, for example—let’s go back to the Politics again.
Obviously there’s an important realm in which—I mean, an important consideration for a
statesman would be to . . . the relationship between the economic realm, or the household
and the polis, and yet he does it very briefly.
LS: Yes, well he speaks about the household in the first book of the Politics.
Same Student: Very briefly.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

347

LS: Yes, what is [there] to say? Because the main point each householder of normal
intelligence knows well enough by himself that he must at least preserve his paternal
estate, property, so that he can be available also financially for public service. I don’t
have the impression that he devotes an inordinately large space to this kind of justice.
That is about—how much is it? One and a half pages, in my edition. Doesn’t seem to be
unfair, compared with the space he devoted to magnanimity or munificence and liberality
and so on. Even if it is a low virtue, ordinary honesty in business dealings is of some
importance and should4 [have] two pages [devoted to it].
Same Student: . . . But it would seem that this would be a very meaningful division
of . . . in modern times, where economic relationships have become so important.
LS: Yes. Well, in modern times economics means something very different from what it
meant for Aristotle. In modern times it has something to do with the market, and in
Aristotle’s time economics means primarily the management of one’s household and
therefore it is strictly an affair of the individual householder. I mean, the economic man
in the classical sense is the man who minds his own business; and the modern economic
man is naturally a public man, because the market is something public and not only in a
metaphorical sense. Yes?
Student: It seems to me that Aristotle here does have in mind the possibility at least of
some sort of a political economy. I mean, he says the proper thing is for all commodities
to have their prices fixed.
LS: Yes. I mean, if you call this political economy, yes. But Aristotle would have
nothing to do with Adam Smith. Do you mean that? Nor with Hobbes, which is only
another name. You can say Adam Smith or Hobbes; you can use the two names more or
less interchangeably. It may sound strange, but I think it is only a mild exaggeration.
Sure, that is clear: there is no absolute sacred right of property, and therefore there can
be, for example, an upper limit to what a man may own. Both Plato and Aristotle take
that for granted, and quite a few other limitations on property rights. Or it may be that
there is a family farm as the backbone of the property, and this family farm may not be
divided—a provision in Plato’s Laws. And so if there is more than one son, the other son
or sons must marry heiresses, you know—if there are some around, let’s hope; if not, a
colony must be sent out in order to prevent overpopulation. But these things do not work
out in practice so smoothly, and the consequence is that the best-laid plans, [the] best-laid
regime, will come into troubles which could not have been prevented by any human
foresight, one reason being that people do not generate just one son and one daughter but
some more, some less. And this creates some disorder, which as orderly people we might
deplore, but against which not much can be done. Or you must have very severe laws,
you know, but even that would not quite work out. We don’t have to go into that, but you
can figure that out for yourself. Yes?
Student: How can we speak at all of political economy . . . Aristotle seems to make the
distinction between politics and economics so clearly . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

348

LS: Yes, but there is something—what do you mean by political economy?
Same Student: Certainly not at all what Aristotle means.
LS: Yes, sure. But what would you say is political economy?
Same Student: . . .
LS: But is there no economy on the part of the polis?
Same Student: . . . part of the polis, but I mean . . .
LS: No, I mean, for example, is the polis not the owner of property? Is the polis not in
need of money: income, taxes, and all these kinds of things? Well, do you think one
could call this public or political economy?
Student: I would call it public, but it would seem that the political man is concerned only
with things political.
LS: How can he do that? Think of Pericles: how much he had to worry about the income
of the Athenian polis in order to be able to build ships and to send out armies. Thucydides
makes clear in his critique of Homer, you know, that the Trojan War lasted so long
because the Greeks had no money: there was no money economy.xx Cervantes put it, in a
slightly different context but not fundamentally different, in his story of knight errantry—
nothing is said [about] whether the knights had clean shirts with them to change into from
time to time. You know, these low things, disregarded in epic poetry, were however
known at all times to people who had . . . And Aristotle of course knew that. You only
have to read the chapter in the Rhetoric on what the statesman, the political man, has to
know,xxi and public finance is one of them, there’s no doubt. But the question is
interesting that it was not called political or public economy in ancient times. The word
“economy” was enlarged; for example, people spoke of the economy of the universe,
meaning of the gods managing the universe as their household. People spoke of the
economy of the truth, which means to dole it out in the proper doses, which is also an
economic action, [an] action of thrift, but they didn’t speak of political economy. And
even in modern times, come to think of it, the original name was not political economy.
Do you remember what it was? Political arithmetic. Sir William Petty, Hobbes’s younger
friend—you see there are still family relations in this—he wrote a book and he called it
Arithmetic, because statistics, as we say today, counting heads, counting the property of a
community, counting the numbers of the various sects, say, in Holland: these
considerations were regarded as very important for political purposes, as I think they
are.xxii But for Aristotle this goes without saying, that that is purely instrumental, and
therefore it is not his primary subject. But this chapter (I think it is Rhetoric book 1,
xx

Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 1.11.
See Aristotle, Rhetoric, book 1, chapter 4, sections 8-12, 1359b23-1360a30.
xxii
Sir William Petty (1623-1687), English political economist and scientist. His Political
Arithmetick was published in 1690.
xxi

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

349

chapter 5 or thereabouts) [deals with] what the political man has to know, and there these
things are mentioned. Yes?
Student: You said that in Aristotle, according to Aquinas, value is not traced to labor
only, that there’s a certain sense in which it can’t be reduced—
LS: Ya, ya. Well, what does this mean? For example, say a man wants to have a golden
bed. Now there is a certain amount of labor: this may not be more than for an iron bed,
for all I know, but probably more. But at any rate, why is gold so much more expensive
than iron? Because it is rarer. That would have been the old answer, whereas, say, the
Marxist answer is that the extraction of gold is much more expensive than the extraction
of iron, and therefore you can reduce the difference in value between gold and iron to the
difference regarding labor, so that the value of any valuable thing can ultimately be
expressed in money alone. And not only money’s worth, as Aristotle has said here before,
but it can be understood in terms ultimately of labor: that’s the key point, not in terms of
demand, as Aristotle says. Demand is the spur with a view to which the unequal things
can be equalized. Marx is the clearest case where things can be equalized with a view to
the labor. And here again one would have to go to the heroes of early modern times, in
this case to Locke, to Locke’s famous statement in chapter 5,xxiii if I remember well, “Of
Property,” where he says nature supplies only the almost worthless materials. The value
comes from labor. There are no things which are in themselves valuable, but they acquire
value through human labor. This is of course diametrically opposed to the Aristotelian
view. Yes?
Student: . . .
LS: There were societies in which the title to full membership, to full citizenship, was
limited to virtuous people—to the better people, as was still said in your parents’ youth.
Ya? The better people. This is regarded today as very unjust, but Aristotle finds this
perfectly just. So Aristotle saw injustices; for example, if the better men must flatter
worse men, he would regard that as a shocking condition, but that the better men have
more power in society than the worse men he found perfectly in order. But generally
stated, Aristotle found that in spite of all imperfections we see here and there and
everywhere, the world is fundamentally in order and does not have to be brought into
order by a revolution, be it political, social, or technological. This is undeniable. To that
extent he was—I don’t know how this is called, they use the term—a square? Aristotle
was a square, if this is the proper term now used by a rebellious young generation.
Aristotle found the world fundamentally in order. [There are] certain blemishes which
can be corrected, no doubt. Others are not truly blemishes if one doesn’t take a very
narrow view, if one considers the whole and considers what can be reasonably expected.
That was his view.
Student: So when Aristotle says the end of politics is the good of man . . .
LS: I can’t understand you.
xxiii

John Locke, “Of Property,” Second Treatise of Government (1690), chapter 5.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

350

Same Student: When Aristotle says then that the end of politics is the good of man, he’s
really saying that the end of politics is to keep things as they are.
LS: No, the good of man, but the possible good of man. The possible good of man. I
mean, a fantastic good of man is no good of man. Possible, that he would say. And that
these things strike us as harsh, quite a few things, is undeniable. For example, there are
some ladies here, and I apologize to them, but Aristotle thought in a very old-fashioned
way about the place of the ladies: surely not in politics. But if you think a bit—only one
thing, to make it more palatable, that our present-day arrangements and our hopes for the
future are based on an economy of plenty, whereas Aristotle took it for granted that there
will always be an economy of scarcity, you will see that it was not just his being a vicious
reactionary, or however you might call that, which is responsible for that. The notion of a
vicious reactionary in the case of Aristotle is of course based on the assumption that there
could be progressives, or there have been progressive thinkers in classical antiquity.
There was a classical scholar, he is still alive, I am happy to report, I forgot his name.
Student: Havelock.
LS: Havelock. Now in jail. He wrote a book about the liberal temper in classical political
philosophy.xxiv Some nasty people called it the liberal distemper. And this man asserted
that there was a whole line of liberal thinkers like, say, the French philosophes of the
eighteenth century and their English equivalents. I think that this didn’t exist. Didn’t
exist. We cannot believe that the party lines as they [have] existed in England since the
seventeenth century and in continental Europe since the eighteenth century, that anything
of this kind existed in classical antiquity. To mention only one point: it was always
understood until the modern seventeenth and eighteenth centuries that the common
people, the dēmos, is on the side of the bigots and is bigoted, and only in the upper, better
classes will you find people who are not bigoted. In other words, there was no popular
enlightenment, which came out of the great changes that [took] place in the seventeenth
century. One must take in the whole picture, and not a statement dragged out of the
context, like “Aristotle asserts [that] slavery is just,” and say, “Look, what a black
man”—I mean [a] morally black man. Well, you have to study it in the context, and in the
context it looks somewhat different. And the context means not only the context of the
Politics: it means the context of all the premises which Aristotle regarded as established
and which he shared with all his contemporaries, and not only his contemporaries in
Greece, but elsewhere as well and in later times as well. The fundamental change came
only in the seventeenth century.
We must stop here, unfortunately, and next time we will begin the section on natural
right, I hope. I advise you to read, if you can, the section in the Rhetoric on natural right,
and that would be what? One second please.

xxiv

Eric A. Havelock, The Liberal Temper in Greek Politics (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1957). Strauss reviewed the book in “The Liberalism of Classical Political Philosophy,” Review
of Metaphysics 12 (1959): 390-439.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 19

351

Student: Book 1, chapter 13.
LS: Yes, you are right. And there is a parallel which we must also consider: book 1,
chapter 13, and book 1, chapter 15, paragraphs 5 to 7 in the Loeb edition. These are the
two chief passages which we have to consider before turning to that single page devoted
to natural right by Aristotle.
1

Deleted “the following explanation is given.”
Deleted “they are.”
3
Deleted “of.”
4
Deleted “be devoted”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

352

Session 20: May 1, 1968
Leo Strauss: And let us now begin at 1133b1.
Reader:
There will therefore be reciprocal proportion when the products have been equated, so
that as farmer is to shoemaker, so may the shoemaker’s product be to the farmer’s
product. And when they exchange their products they must reduce them to the form of a
proportion, otherwise one of the two extremes will have both the excesses; whereas when
they have their own, they then are equal, and can form an association together, because
equality in this sense can be established in their case (farmer A, food C, shoemaker B,
shoemaker’s product equalized D); whereas if it were impossible for reciprocal
proportion to be effected in this way, there could be no association between them.
That it is demand which, by serving as a single standard, holds such an association
together, is shown by the fact that, when there is no demand for mutual service on the
part of both or at least of one of the parties, no exchange takes place between them. i This
inequality of demand has therefore to be equalized.
Now money serves us a guarantee of exchange in the future: supposing we need nothing
at the moment, it ensures that exchange shall be possible when a need arises, for it meets
the requirement of something we can produce in payment so as to obtain the thing we
need. Money, it is true, is liable to the same fluctuation of demand as other commodities,
for its purchasing power varies at different times; but it tends to be comparatively
constant. Hence the proper thing is for all commodities to have their prices fixed; this will
ensure that exchange, and consequently association, shall always be possible. (1133a31b16)
LS: Now let us stop here for a moment. There is one expression which you should
consider. He says, literally translated, “Money wishes to be always the same.” Money
“wishes to be.” This term “wishing” occurs with this meaning in Aristotle and Plato, also
elsewhere. In what sense can it be said of money that it wishes to be something? Aristotle
also says occasionally that nature wishes that the sons of gentlemen should be gentlemen,
and so on. What about money, which is after all the prototype of the nonnatural?
Student: Could it be that there is no proper English way . . . the idiom?
LS: Yes, we would probably say “meaning.” Money is “meant” to be stable, always
stable, whereas of other prices one cannot say that at all. Yes?
Reader:

i

In Rackham’s translation: “no exchange takes place between them [as when someone needs
something that one has oneself, for instance, the state offering a license to export corn in
exchange for wine].”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

353

Money then serves as a measure which makes things commensurable and so reduces
them to equality. If there were no exchange there would be no association, and there can
be no exchange without equality, and no equality without commensurability. Though
therefore it is impossible for things so different to become commensurable in the strict
sense, our demand furnishes a sufficiently accurate common measure for practical
purposes. There must therefore be some one standard, and this accepted by agreement
(which is why it is called nomisma—
LS: On this basis of a hypothesis, of an assumption. This is here used in opposition (this
doesn’t become clear from the translation) to “in truth.” In truth it is impossible that there
can be such a thing making things commensurable. But these things can be made
commensurable on the basis of an agreement or an assumption. This opposition between
assumption and truth has here the same meaning as the distinction between nature and
convention, which we have found before. Yes?
Reader:
(which is why it is called nomisma, customary currency); for such a standard makes all
things commensurable, since all things can be measured by money. Let A be a house, B
ten minae and C a bedstead. Then A=B/2, supposing the house to be worth, or equal to,
five minae. And C (the bedstead)=B/10; it is now clear how many bedsteads are equal to
one house, namely five. It is clear that before money existed this is how the rate of
exchange was actually stated—five beds for a house—since there is no real difference
between that and the price of five beds for a house.
LS: Well, this house was obviously very cheap relative to beds in Greece. And this is in a
way amusing, but it should not be too amusing because we would find probably some
other examples from our world which would be very funny in the eyes of the Greeks.
So this is the end of the thematic discussion of particular justice as such, but now
Aristotle begins with a kind of long corollary to this discussion. And part of the corollary
is the page on natural right, which is a very difficult page, as we shall see; very hard to
understand. But some clue to its understanding is provided by the fact that the discussion
of natural right forms part of this corollary. What the meaning of this corollary is will
appear from the beginning, to which we turn now unless you have a point which you
would like to raise. Then all right, let’s begin.
Reader:
We have now stated what Justice and Injustice are in principle. (1133b16-29)
LS: Literally, “What the just and the unjust is,” but which we may say includes also
justice and injustice as human habits. Yes?
Reader:
From the definition given, it is plain that just conduct is a mean between doing and
suffering injustice, for the former is to have too much, and the latter to have too little.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

354

And Justice is a mode of observing the mean, though not in the same way as the other
virtues are, but because it is related to a mean, while Injustice is related to the extremes.
LS: Yes. Now this is a point which Aristotle makes and which is crucial: that justice, the
just is a mean, as all other good or noble things are, but in a profoundly different way.
Why? To make it quite clear, let us speak of the difference between justice and the
virtues, a distinction which we sometimes find. In the case of the virtues, i.e., the virtues
other than justice, the mean is not the same for all. For example, say, liberality differs
between a very rich and a rather poor man. Socrates could be liberal by spending much
less money than, say, Callias or another rich man. Or the simplest case: moderation,
temperance. We will remember the example of Milo, who by eating enormous amounts
of steaks was still moderate. ii Every other man would have been immoderate if he had
taken in so many things.
Now here is the point. In the case of justice or the just, there is no such relativity to the
doer. Take a simple case of buying and selling: whether you are rich or poor, strong or
weak, fat or thin does not make any difference as regards the just price. This is at least the
Aristotelian view. Also, if you have the misfortune of committing murder, it does not
make any difference whether you are a nice man or a nasty man, as Aristotle has made
clear. So in the case of the just things, [there is] no relativity to the doer, whereas in the
other cases, the relativity is necessary. And this is the theme in a way for the discussion
which follows. And let us see what Aristotle has to say about it. Let us go on at 1134a1.
Reader:
Also, Justice is that quality in virtue of which a man is said to be disposed to do
by deliberate choice that which is just, and, when distributing things between
himself and another, or between two others, not to give too much to himself and
too little to his neighbour of what is desirable, and too little to himself and too
much to his neighbour of what is harmful, but to each what is proportionately
equal; and similarly when he is distributing between two other persons. Injustice
on the contrary is similarly related to that which is unjust, which is a
disproportionate excess or deficiency of something beneficial or harmful. Hence
Injustice is excess and defect, in the sense that it results in excess and defect:
namely, in the offender’s own case, an excess of anything that is generally
speaking beneficial and a deficiency of anything harmful, and in the case of
others, though the result as a whole is the same, the deviation from proportion
may be in either direction as the case may be.
Of the injustice done, the smaller part is the suffering and the larger part the doing
of injustice.
So much may be said about the nature of Justice and Injustice, and of the Just and
the Unjust regarded universally. (1133b30-1134a16)

ii

See 1106a31-b4.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

355

LS: Well, this seems to be largely repetitious, but it paves the way for the following
discussion, which is begun by the remark that the mean in the case of justice is something
very different from the mean in the case of the other virtues. Now let us first try to reach
some clarity about this difference. Perhaps if we look first at the beginning of the next
section.
Reader:
But seeing that a man may commit injustice without actually being unjust, what is it that
distinguishes those unjust acts the commission of which renders a man actually unjust
under one of the various forms of injustice, for example, a thief or an adulterer or a
brigand? Or shall we rather say that the distinction does not lie in the quality of the act?
For a man may have intercourse with a woman knowing who she is, yet not from the
motive of deliberate choice, but under the influence of passion—
LS: Well, we have seen these examples or similar examples before. They have to do with
the peculiar character of justice. In the case of justice, the character of the individual
seems to be less important than in the case of the other virtues. And inversely, it is
therefore possible to act unjustly without being an unjust man. Justice seems to be much
less relative to the individual and is much less relative to the individual, and therefore [it
is] also bound much less to the qualities of the individual than the other virtues.
Since justice is essentially toward the other, the emphasis shifts naturally on[to] the
actions in contradistinction to what is in the individual’s, let us say, intentions. Now this
is now corrected. The man who acts unjustly is not an unjust man, and therefore we have
to see what precisely makes a man unjust. In other words, how many or what kind of
adulteries are needed in order to make a man who only acts unjustly into an unjust man?
What is unjust? This cannot be answered without raising the question: what is just? We
have therefore to consider various possibilities, some discussed before, as to what is
justice. This is what the sequel is about. Yes?
Reader:
in such a case, though he has committed injustice, he is not an unjust man: for instance,
he is not a thief, though guilty of theft, not an adulterer, though he has committed
adultery, and so forth.
The relation of Reciprocity—
LS: So this is obviously the point which we have to try to understand: where to draw the
line between the occasional evil-doer and the evil-doing man—the “simply evil man,” as
he puts it. Yes?
Reader:
The relation of Reciprocity to Justice has been stated already. (1134a17-24)
LS: So that is the reference to the discussion of the Pythagorean doctrine, which we have
read. And this is one possibility: that the just might be the reciprocal. And here the

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

356

question of intention doesn’t arise at all, because here, at least as Aristotle presents it,
even voluntariness or involuntariness do not enter. A man has killed another man; the
reciprocal: he will be killed. And even if voluntariness does not enter, still there is
intentionality, choice, proairesis. Yes?
Reader:
But we must not forget that the subject of our investigation is at once Justice simplyiii and
Political Justice. Political Justice means justice—
LS: Now one second. So in other words, Aristotle defines how we seek what justice is,
and that requires that we seek what is practically in the highest degree, the fullest degree
just: the unqualifiedly just and the politically just. How are these two things related to
each other? That is important, because Aristotle does not explain it; at least [he] does not
explicitly state it. I believe the sequel will show that they are identical. The unqualifiedly
just and the politically just are the same. But let us see whether this is true.
Reader:
Political Justice means justice as between free and (actually or proportionately) equal
persons, living a common life for the sake of being self-sufficient.iv Hence between
people not suchv political justice cannot exist, but only a sort of justice in a metaphorical
sense.
LS: In other words, these forms of justice, whatever they may be, say, between a master
and a slave, or between two foreigners meeting in a third city, let us say: that is not fully
justice, as we will later on try to explain. So it would seem that this passage shows that
the unqualifiedly just and the politically just are identical. Now he explains this more
fully.
Reader:
For justice can only exist between those whose mutual relations are regulated by law, and
law exists among those between whom there is a possibility of injustice, for the
administration of the law means the discrimination of what is just and what is unjust.
Persons therefore between whom injustice can exist can act unjustly towards each other
(although unjust action does not necessarily involve injustice)—
LS: That is a repetition of what we have seen before about the thief and so on. Yes?
Reader:
to act unjustly meaning to assign oneself too large a share of things generally good and
too small a share of things generally evil. (1134a24-34)
LS: The argument runs as follows. The unqualifiedly just is the politically just. And now
a kind of confirmation: justice in the full sense can exist only among men who are
iii

In Rackham’s translation: “Justice in the absolute sense.”
In Rackham’s translation: “for the purpose of satisfying their needs.”
v
In Rackham’s translation: “people not free and equal.”
iv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

357

connected or held together by law. But law is of course political; hence unqualified
justice and political justice are identical. Aristotle develops this latter point towards the
end of the Ethics in 1180a18, which we might consult: “The paternal command does not
have the strength.” Yes?
Reader:
Now paternal authority has not the power to compel obedience, nor indeed, speaking
generally, has the authority of any individual unless he be a king or the like; but law on
the other hand is a rule, emanating from a certain wisdom and intelligence, that has
compulsory force. Men are— (1180a18-22)
LS: Yes. Now that is what we need for our purposes. So the context: in order to make
men good, the domestic authority, paternal authority, is insufficient. And the only thing
which can fulfill this highest function of political life—to make the citizens good and
doers of noble deeds—is the law, and hence the polis. Good. Law and justice in the full
sense are coextensive. This thesis needs a long commentary. How do we know that, on
the basis of what we have read in Aristotle? He said something about the relation of the
just and the legal. Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: He said that they weren’t necessarily the same.
LS: How did he put it, in his niceness?
Same Student: I don’t remember exactly the words he used.
Another Student: “Is not simply just.”
LS: “Is somehow.” The legal things are “somehow” the just things. And this “somehow”
is a deep ditch into which we will not try to fall now. Yes, now?
Reader:
This is why we do not permit a man to rule, but the law—
LS: We do not allow a man to rule but “the logos,” it says here in one reading, which is
as good as the law, as we have seen from the parallel passage in the tenth book. Yes?
Reader:
because a man rules in his own interest, and becomes a tyrant; but the function of a ruler
is to be the guardian of justice, and if of justice, then of equality. A just ruler seems to
make nothing out of his office; for he does not allot to himself a larger share of things
generally good, unless it be proportionate to his merits; so that he labours for others,
which accounts for the saying mentioned above, that ‘Justice is the good of others.’
Consequently some recompense has to be given him, in the shape of honour and dignity.
It is those whom such rewards do not satisfy who make themselves tyrants. (1134a35-b8)

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

358

LS: Yes, let us stop here for a moment. So in principle there could be rule of a just man,
as is stated by Aristotle in other places, even in the Ethics later on; in the Politics more
emphatically. But a just man would be a man who would altogether devote himself to
others; and therefore ruling has no attraction for him, and therefore he needs recompense
other than ruling. You know this thought, I trust.
Student: Excuse me, earlier . . . before but it said that justice consists in not taking too
much of good things and not too little of evil things.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: How can justice consist in taking evil things?
LS: Paying taxes. Taxes are a burden. [Laughter]
Same Student: But how can that be regarded as evil, when in the long run that . . .
LS: Yes. Well, but still, let us take the simple case in which all men whose second name
begins with an A have to pay three times as much tax as the other citizens. Would this be
in the long run desirable? So in other words, equality not only of benefits but also of
burdens. And the unjust man is precisely the one who wants to have too much of the
benefits and too little of the burdens.
Same Student: In the best regime, would men have to suffer these evils unjustly? Or
would it be just to still suffer . . .
LS: What kind of evils? I don’t hear so well.
Same Student: Would these things, such as paying taxes be—to be very clear; in other
words, in the best regime there wouldn’t be a law that said that every man with last name
A—
LS: Of course not. I use that as an extreme example, but there are approximations to it
even in actual cities, you know, where conventional distinctions are taken as if they were
natural differences. In the best regime, if we assume that such a thing is possible, as we
should, there would of course never be an unjust law, never an unjust judgment. That
goes without saying, because the men who rule and who make the laws and are the
judges are by definition perfect gentlemen, and therefore nothing [unjust] can happen.
That is the premise. Now whether that is feasible in such an imperfect world, that is a
long question. Yes?
Student: Can I ask a different—about whether earlier that sentence just in connection
with this last point: that’s why we don’t permit a man to rule. But if the alternative
reading there is significant, nomon or logon—

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

359

LS: Yes, well the nomos is the logos, but a logos of a certain kind: a logos who has found
the . . . of the politeia, of the regime, be it the gentleman, be it the dēmos, be it a
combination or what have you. Is not every law a logos, even in the most external sense?
“He who does that will be punished in that and that way.” You can only say there is an
ambiguity there, because this sounds like a prophecy, like a prediction. And a prediction
is not always fulfilled; therefore one should add the qualification, “if he is caught.” Then
it becomes the truth. But this, of course, the legislator in his solemnity refuses to do, and
you can easily see why. There is a certain impropriety in making this implication clear:
the kind of pointing to criminality as a way out of doing what the legislator commands.
Yes?
Student: I was just curious as to—when you said that a just man would be the man who
would devote himself to others . . . would it be possible then in this instance, especially in
the instance if the best regime would have the just man ruling, would it be possible then
for a good man to be a just man in that instance or in any regime? Namely, to rule
because in devoting himself to others who would be his inferiors, he would be in a sense
being unjust to himself, assigning himself an improper . . .
LS: Yes, this is a certain complication. But the question is whether that is not preferable
to being ruled by inferior men. This is in a way the central political argument of the
Republic more than of Aristotle. But Aristotle seems to allude to that when he speaks of
this pay the just man or ruler has to receive, an argument which occurs in the first book of
the Republic.vi
Same Student: Could a magnanimous man, for example, remain magnanimous if he was
to take upon himself the burden of ruling, which would be—
LS: Yes. Well, why not? We are speaking of the magnanimous man as defined in book 4.
He demands for himself high honors, and he gets them. I mean, if he were to become a
dogcatcher, he would reject that honor because it is a small honor. But if he should be
elected president of the United States, he would say: “I will not run, but if elected
[laughter], I will accept it.” Well, running is bad, you know? That is a sign of philotimia,
or in Latin, ambitio.
Same Student: Yes, but I had assumed, perhaps wrongly, that the honors that these types
of men would have to offer them are actually insignificant, are honors that he isn’t
desirous of. I mean, they are really meaningless honors, honors . . . inferior men.
LS: Yes, but on the other hand, you must not aim too high, because if you do that, this
whole sphere becomes invisible, becomes gray. And that is precisely why Aristotle has
written the Ethics in the way he did: keeping from us, from our sight, philosophy as long
as possible because otherwise, if philosophy appears these things become bad.
Same Student: Well, this is a . . . from outside—
vi

Plato, Republic 347b-d.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

360

LS: And I would say it is perfectly reasonable what Aristotle does, for we are not
philosophers in Aristotle’s sense. You know? And therefore we have to be reasonable.
Same Student: I was thinking of the example from literature that Shakespeare presents
us with: Coriolanus, who can’t accept the honors—I mean, who is not desirous of
accepting the type of honors which are necessary if he is to rule, namely, the honors of
the plebes. I mean, that’s not really a philosophical problem either; it’s a problem of a
man. You know, the honors . . .
LS: Well, if we take Socrates as a good example of what they meant by philosopher,
Socrates was not desirous of any honors. So that is simple. But almost all men are not
Socrateses, and therefore for them honors are very important. And among these men, the
tremendous majority of men1 are eager to have honors; there are some outstanding men
who are willing to accept only high honors. Now this may be sheer folly on their part.
There are such people who regard themselves as worthy of high honors without being
[so]; we can dismiss them as fools. But then there are others who demand high honors for
themselves and deserve them. It is true, one can always present such people as a bit
ridiculous. I used the example of General Montgomery a few times, who can easily be
held up for ridicule and yet he doubtless deserved the high honors which he received. But
to the extent to which we find it slightly ridiculous, we are probably affected by the
presence in our universe of philosophy or some equivalent of philosophy, something
transpolitical. But within the political sphere we must take this very seriously, even if it
hurts us. Did I answer your question? Good. Yes. This point has now—all these things
are meant to make clear what justice par excellence, that’s to say, political justice is. And
this has been clear up to this point. Now let us read the rest of this section.
Reader:
Justice between master and slave and between father and child is not the same as absolute
and political justice, but only analogous to them. For there is no such thing as injustice in
the absolute sense towards what is one’s own; and a chattel, or a child till he has
reachedvii a certain age and becomes independent, is, as it were, part of oneself, and no
one chooses to harm himself; hence there can be no injustice towards them, and therefore
nothing just or unjust in the political sense.
LS: There is therefore no justice towards oneself. Yes?
Reader:
For these, as we saw, are embodied in law, and exist between persons whose relations are
naturally regulated by law, that is, persons who share equally in ruling and being ruled.
Hence Justice exists in a fuller degree between husband and wife than between father and
children, or master and slaves; in fact, justice between husband and wife is Domestic
Justice in the real sense, though this too is different from Political Justice. (1134b8-18)
LS: These are the only specimens which Aristotle gives us [of] a justice which is not
political or, as you might say, of subpolitical justice. And these are the relations of a man
vii

In Rackham’s translation: “till it reaches.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

361

not to a fellow citizen but to what is his own, be it a slave, or a child, or a wife. The slave:
that is clear, that he is simply the property. And if he takes away something from the
slave, he takes away his property from his property; that is to say, there is no injustice
involved. The same is true of a child: if a father takes away a toy from a child to which
the child is very much addicted, that is not injustice, the toy being the father’s property. It
might be unkind, and one could perhaps say, and Aristotle would admit that, that in some
sense it is unjust: the father had given it to the child. But Aristotle would add: “in some
sense.” No law would provide for that; no judge would take on this case. The case of the
wife is somewhat different, because there may be some laws regarding dowries and so
on, very substantial things; and therefore the wife belongs also to other citizens: her
father, her brothers, and therefore she is almost a citizen, but not quite.
But the interesting case of course would be that [between], let us take two human beings,
one a free man and one a slave, but belonging to different cities. Is there no relation of
justice between them? They meet on a crossroad, and one begins to throw stones at the
other, wholly unprovoked, and then finally the whole thing ends with killing. Is this not a
place where justice, or injustice, for that matter, would occur? Aristotle says so: it would.
He speaks in the Ethics later on that there are relations of justice among all human
beings. There can be no friendship between a freeman and a slave as slave, but there can
be friendship between the free man and the slave in the slave’s capacity as a human
being, for there can be friendship and justice between all beings that possess speech or
reason. So surely there are relations of justice among complete strangers, free or slaves,
male or female, or what have you. But what Aristotle means [is that] these relations of
justice are extremely limited. Justice reaches its fullness only among fellow citizens,
where all possible relations of justice can be fully actual, whereas they cannot be fully
actual in the subpolitical forms of justice.
Now we have learned then this: in order to find out what the difference between an unjust
man and a man who happens to commit an unjust act is, we have to find out what
injustice is. Therefore we have to find out what justice is; and therefore in the first place
what is emphatically just, unqualifiedly just, and that proved to be the politically just.
And the politically just proved to be the justice obtaining among fellow citizens, i.e.,
obtaining among men united and ruled by law. This seems to lead to the consequence that
the sphere of justice coincides completely with the sphere of law. Is then justice
essentially based on law? Is all justice legal, conventional? And Aristotle approaches this
question in the next chapter, [in] a short page, a single page on natural right.
For the better understanding of this passage, we should have a look at Aristotle’s
Rhetoric, book 1, chapter 13, which I will read to you here.
“Justice and injustice have been defined with regard to laws and human beings in a
twofold manner. By law I understand the peculiar law and the common law. [Let me say
universal law in order to avoid the ambiguity of the term “common law” in English. The
peculiar law and the universal law.—LS] The peculiar law is the one which people have
established for themselves in their relation, and this peculiar law is unwritten and also
partly written. The universal law is the law according to nature. [So whereas the one kind

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

362

of law is man-made, there is a law which is not man-made—LS]. For there is, as all men
divine, a justice and injustice which is by nature universal, even if there is no community
nor convention among men, as Sophocles’s Antigone appears to say, that it is forbidden,
that it is just although forbidden to bury her brother, since this is just by nature. [And then
he quotes two verses from the Antigone.—LS] ‘For neither today nor yesterday, but
always does this live, and no one knows from where it came to sight’ [this law—LS].
And as Empedocles says about not killing animate beings, for this is not just for one
people and unjust for others [as killing cows is for the Hindus and not for other people—
LS] and as Alcidamas says in his messianic speech.”
He seems to have said that god let all men be free; nature has not made a single man a
slave.viii
So Aristotle says that all men divine that there is a universal law, nomos, a natural law.
And he gives three examples. Let us consider the examples, starting from the last.
Slavery is radically unnatural. Is this a good example of a natural law according to
Aristotle? What is Aristotle’s official teaching regarding slavery?
Student: He says that there are some men who are slaves.
LS: Yes. So this is not a good example from Aristotle’s point of view. What about
Empedocles’s natural law forbidding the killing of animate beings, of animals? Was
Aristotle a vegetarian or in favor of vegetarianism? Nothing is known. The case of
Antigone, I do not know; we have no sufficient evidence to say whether Aristotle
regarded Antigone’s view of her right as a natural right, whether he agreed with that. It is
an open question, then, but surely two of the three examples which Aristotle gives of the
natural law, these are not good examples from Aristotle’s point of view. Now why could
Aristotle do such a thing? Well, this occurs in the Rhetoric, and the Rhetoric deals with
what kind of arguments a man must use in order to achieve an acquittal or a
condemnation before a law court. And in this connection it becomes necessary
sometimes—if the positive law speaks for the defendant, let us say, and you want to have
a condemnation, then you appeal to the natural law. And that is explicitly stated here, and
vice versa. So in other words, natural law is an important topic of rhetoric and is treated
as such. We cannot regard this passage of the Rhetoric as evidence proving that Aristotle
believed in natural law. Yes?
Student: Isn’t it even more peculiar, since natural justice here comes up as one kind of
political justice, in the sense that Antigone involves . . . outside the polis—I mean, the
conflict is one between the gods and the city, between Creon—that it would be outside
the polis.
LS: But that is not so simple, because the polis has also gods, and therefore what the
gods of the polis demand might be in disagreement with what the human ruler of the polis
says, but the relation to the polis would still exist. I believe the context here in the Ethics
is this: Aristotle has created the impression that the true right is the political right, and the
viii

Aristotle, Rhetoric 1373b1-18. Presumably Strauss’s translation.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

363

political right is the legal right, and therefore he must raise the question: but is then all
right legal due to human establishment? Is there nothing natural in right? And that is the
question to which he turns now. I only wanted to discuss, as a kind of introduction, the
passage in the Rhetoric and show that this cannot be adduced as evidence of Aristotle’s
view in this matter. Yes?
Student: There was just a curiosity in that passage in the Rhetoric that I would like to
inquire to, namely, you pointed out, for example, that the problem might be the polis’s
gods versus the human ruler. But in the passage that Aristotle quotes from the Antigone,
he omits the line which attributes those divine—when Antigone makes her speech, she
talks about eternal laws, but Aristotle admits the line about the gods which would have
seemed to me in the law court to be a very compelling evidence in favor of . . . feelings
about . . .
LS: Yes, but perhaps Aristotle thought differently.
Same Student: . . .
LS: One can say this, that Aristotle’s thesis regarding the polis is stated very clearly at
the beginning of the Politics: the polis is natural. And this means in the first place, of
course, it is not merely conventional. That’s clear. But there is another implication which
is also not unimportant: the polis is not sacred; or its sacredness must be understood in
subordination to its naturalness, and therefore the whole sphere of the sacred things is
subordinate to the polis: that is simply one political office, if you can call it a political
office, that of the priesthood. Differently stated, the gods of the polis are really relative to
the polis, and if we want to discover the true gods, we must go beyond the gods of the
polis. So shall we then turn to the short chapter on natural right?
Reader:
Political justice is of two kinds, one natural, the other conventional.
LS: One can also say “legal”—that is not forbidden. Yes?
Reader:
Justice is natural that has the same power everywhere, and does not depend on being
accepted or not. Justice is conventional that in the beginning may be settled in one way or
the other indifferently,ix though having once been settled it is not indifferent— (1134b1821)
LS: The simplest example is left or right driving, or anything of this kind. There is no
superiority of one to the other, but once it is settled, it does make all the difference. In
other words, you have to obey it. But there are things which do not in any way depend on
how it seems. That was the formula for the establishment of a law: edoxe tō demō, it
ix

In Rackham’s translation: “A rule of justice is natural that has the same validity everywhere,
and does not depend on our accepting it or not. A rule is conventional that in the first instance
may be settled in one way or the other indifferently.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

364

pleased the dēmos, it seemed to the dēmos. For the positive law, for the legal law—
“right,” it’s better to say—for the legal right, opinion, seeming, decision, is decisive.
Nothing of this kind enters natural right. This point is of course the first step in any
exposition of what natural right means and has therefore been repeated very frequently.
But is there any difficulty which any one of you senses? He should speak up now. Yes?
Student: Perhaps a difficulty is just in deciding whether it really is indifferent . . . The
case of left and right hand driving obviously is indifferent.
LS: Well, I have not sufficiently investigated whether there is not some peculiarity, be it
of the British or of the climate of Britain, which makes it desirable to have left driving.
All right. But it seems, at any rate, that it is just an arbitrary but indispensable decision.
But the question is, something which has everywhere the same force, that alone is
natural. And of course the question would be to find something which has everywhere the
same force, and what Aristotle will tell us about that. Now let us go on.
Reader:
For example, that the ransom for a prisoner shall be a mina, that a sacrifice shall consist
of a goat and not of two sheep; and any regulations enacted for particular cases, for
instance, the sacrifice in honor of Brasidas, and ordinances in the nature of special
decrees. (1134b21-24)
LS: Yes, let us stop here for one moment. Now these are all examples of positive laws, as
we would say. Do these examples give us any guidance toward natural right?
Student: These are all unnatural cases.
LS: But if something natural is hidden in them, how do we get at it? Since the natural is
the same everywhere, you must abstract from the particular. You must generalize and
even universalize, and perhaps we arrive then at natural right. Yes?
Student: Well, perhaps everywhere prisoners are ransomed, but it is arbitrary for how
much, and everywhere sacrifices are made, but it is arbitrary what.
LS: Yes, but is there ransoming of prisoners everywhere?
Student: Both examples point to war being everywhere.
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: War seems to be everywhere.
LS: That would lead to the consequence, what, that war is an institute of international
law? I believe that is a traditional teaching in modern times, but it would of course lead to
grave questions regarding just and unjust wars. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

365

Student: Well, having made an arbitrary decision, it seems the tendency is, no matter
what the arbitrary decision is, to obey the decision and conforming to it, understanding
that nonconformity to it would be an unjust action.
LS: That Aristotle does not even say here, although it is—
Student: . . .
LS: No, no, I meant in a different way. After all, you could say the ransom could be two
minae instead of one. Generally speaking, to ransom prisoners. Now what are the
prisoners? We assume that they are fellow citizens, of course, and they have fallen into a
misfortune which they could not have foreseen and into which they fell, perhaps being in
the service of the city. Now if we generalize accordingly, the polis is responsible for
helping the citizens who have come into troubles in their service to the city, which makes
sense as a proposition of what is everywhere just, good. And even if one could say [that]
if there are people who don’t do that, they are in this respect unjust people [in] that they
do not recognize their obligation.
Student: Well, I don’t understand why it can’t go beyond that to the notion that people
have an inherent understanding that unless certain decisions are obeyed—be they
arbitrary—driving on one side of the street or the other, being ransomed or not, that there
is a justice in obeying these decisions, without which, you know, the political state would
be chaotic.
LS: Something of this kind I believe is in Aristotle’s mind, but I would like that we
proceed step by step. Now the other example (this was already answered by Mr. Pangle)
that is a matter of positive law, whether you should sacrifice, say, on such and such an
occasion a goat or two sheep, but that you should sacrifice, that you should worship the
gods, that is everywhere valid. Simply if you say—monotheism is one special form of
this. That is everywhere the case. Yes, so then we would have some inkling from these
examples. But let us go on.
Reader:
Some people think that all just things are conventional, because whereas a thing by nature
is unchangeable and has the same power everywhere, as fire burns both here and in
Persia, just things are seen to differ. x (1134b24-27)
LS: Yes, this we have already seen in the first book, near the beginning, that there were
such people who said even that all noble things are conventional and also the good things
are not simply good. You remember that. Here it is said specifically about the just things,
because the just things are all in motion: constant changes not only in the positive
law, that is taken for granted, but even in what people consider as intrinsically just. More
than that, even what is intrinsically just is in motion. Yes?
x

In Rackham’s translation: “Some people think that all rules of justice are merely conventional,
because whereas a law of nature is immutable and has the same validity everywhere, as fire burns
both here and in Persia, rules of justice are seen to vary.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

366

Student: Just a question. Supposing I went up and I asked Aristotle, take, for example,
the notion of fairness. Now everybody has a notion of fairness; now its material
application may differ from person to person or from community to community, but it is
a standard—I mean it’s, you know, it’s an understanding which is changeless. There has
always been a notion of fairness.
LS: Yes, Aristotle knows that, and his analysis of commutative and distributive justice
has even tried to spell out what we mean vaguely when we speak of fairness. In some
cases, it means simple equality, [as] in the case of commutative justice; and in the case of
distributive justice, it means a proportional equality. He has made this clear. But let us
see how he pursues his argument. It would have been so very easy for him to say: We
have said before [that] the principles of commutative and distributive justice are
unchangeable. But let us see what he says.
Reader:
This is not so, but it is true in a way. Among the gods indeed it is perhaps not true at all;
but in our world, although there is such a thing by nature, all is changeable. But
nevertheless there is something by nature just. xi
LS: And the other?
Reader:
as well as not ordained by nature.xii (1134b27-30)
LS: Yes. Now here we have the decisive remark. Thomas Aquinas has explained this
whole chapter along the following terms: the highest principles of natural law are
unchangeable; and for practical purposes that means the Second Table of the Ten
Commandments. But when you go down to more specific cases, then natural right
becomes changeable.xiii But Aristotle doesn’t make the distinction between the
unchangeable principles and the changeable consequences. He says . . .xiv all right, both
natural and positive, is changeable. Yes?
Student: But if everything is changeable, doesn’t this in some way qualify the earlier
statement in chapter 6, in which he said justice exists only between those relations which
can be regulated by law, because—
LS: No, justice par excellence. He doesn’t say that justice exists only among fellow
citizens. Justice in the fullest sense exists only—

xi

In Rackham’s translation: “That rules of justice vary is not absolutely true, but only with
qualifications. Among the gods indeed it is perhaps not true at all; but in our world, although
there is such a thing as Natural Justice, all rules of justice are variable.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “Justice as well as justice not ordained by nature.”
xiii
See Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae, First Part of the Second Part, Question 94, Article 4.
xiv
The tape skips at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

367

Same Student: But I mean it would seem that the highest incidence of justice, or that just
act which is naturally just, in some way is antithetical to law which is everywhere
nonchangeable or immutable, and, I mean, it seems a really significant confrontation here
between law—
LS: And therefore, in the first place, what is—
Same Student: which I assume to remain law, it couldn’t be . . . everywhere
commutable, but would have to be immutable, like—xv I mean law, it couldn’t be
everywhere—
LS: Unqualifiedly just. And that proves to be the political. When we hear Aristotle speak
about natural right, do we have to think of the Second Table of the Decalogue, or do we
have to think of such examples as possibly implied in his examples here, namely,
ransoming prisoners and sacrificing to the gods? Now I would say, let us say this: that
sacrificing to the gods, or still more generally, worshiping the gods, is everywhere just.
Hence one could say it is not changeable. And he seems to say that it is changeable.
Same Student: Yeah, well I’m not specifically referring to Aquinas’s examples, or even
to Aquinas himself, but—
LS: Aristotle, you mean.
Same Student: No, you brought in Aquinas.
LS: Yes, all right, I returned to Aristotle’s examples, and I wanted—
Same Student: I’m just asking how, if justice is everywhere mutable, how it can be at
the same time be said to be in some sense equivalent to law?
LS: Oh, I see now what you mean. It is not equivalent to law. I mean, it is no accident
that Aristotle speaks of the natural right, or what is by nature right, and what is right by
law. The natural right has nothing to do with law. In the more popular formulation of the
Rhetoric, he speaks of the koinos nomos, of the common or universal law. xvi Not here: he
speaks of right, not of law, and one reason, I believe, is that he wants to keep away
altogether the notion of law. Something could be right without having the form of law.
When you speak of law, you presuppose a lawgiver. Who would be the lawgiver of
natural law? It could only be the gods. And of the gods Aristotle says somewhere that
they rule not by issue [of] commands. So there is no place for natural law, but natural
right could very well be. For example, certain relations, certain proportions, certain
harmonies could be intrinsically right, like that of the just price or just wages or what
have you, and without any lawgiver. So we are concerned only with natural right, not
with natural law.
xv
xvi

There are skips in the tape at several points here.
See Aristotle, Rhetoric 1373b4-6.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

368

Same Student: But at the same time, I mean, the thing is that, for example, when he, at
least in my translation, refers to a law of nature and then points out—
LS: No, that is—
Same Student: Would not there be this—I mean, in which way can he speak of, let’s
say, a law of nature if there were no promulgators but, say, some type of—
LS: Yes, but one very simple thing: you cannot hold Aristotle responsible for what the
translator does.
Same Student: Well, I mean, it seems that—
LS: Who is that translator?
Same Student: It’s the one that we’re reading.
LS: No. Does Rackham translate, no?
Same Student: Regarding the fire in Persia, he said that—
Another Student: he speaks of . . . for justice, but . . .
Previous Student: A law he says, whereas the law of nature is immutable.
LS: That he doesn’t say. “What is by nature is immutable and has everywhere the same
force, just as fire burns both here and in Persia.” And the just things men see being
changed, undergoing change. It is only a question of right, and that is not merely a socalled semantic distinction, but the whole question of divine legislation is at stake. And
that does not exist for Aristotle, but there could very well be a natural right, and he
asserts that there is a natural right and we must try to find out what it is. It has
everywhere the same force, but it is changeable. Now if we take the simplest example,
that of worshiping the gods, how could this be changeable? One could say, for example,
up to a certain point, one goat, and then a change to two sheep. But this one could rightly
say is not a change of the principle, it is only a change of the determination of the
universal law by the human legislator. But the true change would be simply not to
sacrifice. How could this be? Well, there could be a time of famine or some other thing.
So in other words, there is no human right which is not changeable, namely, because of
the changeability of human situations. Yes?
Student: Would the circumstance of the famine be that it [is] necessary for the people to
eat the sheep. I mean, would that be the way it was . . .
LS: Yes.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

369

Same Student: Well, I was thinking in terms of Thucydides, where people see the just
and unjust perishing alike and . . . forgotten things to write down.
LS: That is a hypothetical argument to which we find no reference here. But the key
point is simply that what is in itself just [is] to worship the gods. And the same would of
course be true also of the ransoming of prisoners: this might in a given case be more
damaging to the polis than not ransoming them. There are all kinds of people who have
become captives and all kinds of enemies, and there is a great variety of circumstances;
therefore there is nothing which we can say which is universally valid. Even if we take
the case of such a manifestly fundamental thing, and much more important in our eyes
than the two examples alluded to by Aristotle: the prohibition against murder. There is a
classic case of the two men on a shipwreck. Only one man can survive. And the stronger
one pushes the weaker one, or the luckier one pushes the unluckier one, from the wreck.
It is clear murder. [There are] attenuating circumstances, but still, can we say he acted
unjustly? Can we say that? And one can argue, “Well, you say he acted unjustly.” “I see.”
But then one has to go into some casuistry there. If one is the father and the other is the
son, and the father might solve the problem by saying, “Well, you still have your life in
front of you and I am old,” and he commits suicide. Suicide conceivably can also be
understood to be an unjust act. Is it better that they die, both, than one is saved? These are
hard questions. At any rate, we come sooner or later (and let us always hope later) to a
sphere of half-darkness, where the clear distinction between right and wrong which we
can draw in normal times, in normal circumstances, cannot be drawn. And that would be
a confirmation of what Aristotle says, that all right is changeable. Yes?
Student: I believe [that] in just about every example you’ve brought up of the cases of
these examples being changeable, you’re somehow going toward the principle of selfpreservation, either of the city or of an individual. In what sense is that—
LS: Yes. I hadn’t thought of it . . . but it makes sense, doesn’t it? I mean, it makes sense
if we take in certain other facts of which we happen to have knowledge.
Same Student: That’s why I wanted to ask if it was just simply a practical matter in
which the natural right became either meaningless or changed. If it was just practical
consideration—
LS: Let us never forget that this is meant to be a practical book from cover to cover. So
“merely practical” would not be an objection.
Same Student: No, I didn’t mean it in a disparaging sense, but in the sense that there are
other considerations in which the—
LS: Which other considerations can there be in practical matters like considerations of
practice?
Same Student: Well, in terms of the example that you used, that it’s always right or
correct to worship the gods of the city, and the example was a famine, in which case food

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

370

was needed for the citizens. Well, another—the complicated example that was alluded to
in Thucydides, the things upon which worshiping the gods apparently depend are lost
sight of or . . .
LS: But you would not call a man [unjust] who does not worship the gods because he is
very gravely ill. We wouldn’t call him an unjust man from any point of view, would we?
That is a different case. But you mean the way in which those who were not gravely sick
were affected.
Same Student: Yes. I mean, by watching the course of human events and seeing—
LS: One fate expects the just man as well as—
Same Student: Seeing the unjust man go to bed and sleep the sleep of—
LS: But they would no longer believe in natural justice on this ground. This would not
yet dispose of the fact that natural justice remains as such. Is this not a different—I mean,
let us say [that] if natural justice is changeable, this means that in all these cases the
distinction between justice and injustice remains in full force. Only its content changes;
say, from normal circumstances to extreme, emergency situations, or however you call it.
Same Student: Yes. I might as well lay my cards on the table.
LS: And what is that?
Same Student: I was thinking of a possible consideration that would lead one to think
that what was underlying natural law might bring in considerations other than purely,
instead of merely practical considerations. The unchanging underlying the changed—
LS: Yes, what would that be?
Student: That would be justice that makes particular things just. Justice . . .
LS: I believe it is clearer if we use a more general expression. Justice after all is a human
virtue, isn’t it, as Aristotle speaks of it? Can one not say the nature of man is that
unchangeable which remains in all the changes, and to that extent, the Athenians in the
time of the plague and the Athenians in happier circumstances were all human beings and
within the limits of man’s nature? As for the one of you who said self-preservation of the
polis or the individual—were you the one?
Same Student: No. Mr. West.
LS: Oh, Mr. West. I should know you. [Laughter] I would say this: this would seem to
show how wise Hobbes was when he said self-preservation is the key to all justice. It
wouldn’t make it Aristotelian—on the contrary—but it would be a good starting point for
understanding Hobbes. Miss . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

371

Student: Except that in the examples in which it comes out so clearly that selfpreservation is more important, they are also very extreme examples in which case you
could say . . . on the ship, that these men are complicated . . . in their . . . xvii
LS: —there is no possibility of calling . . . society where you cannot call in the police or
the judge. And in addition, they would also be—2well, take a specific political context.
Some extremely dangerous mission: whom do you send? You send a man for all practical
purposes into his death and you know it; that’s also one of these questions. In brief, I
think this example of the two men shipwrecked would show that Aristotle’s thesis [that]
there is no statement on right which is universally valid, which is unchangeable, makes
sense. One cannot anticipate the situations, situations which may be caused by a
particularly beastly enemy. Of course you can say we will not use his methods because
we would then ourselves become utterly barbarized. But there are limits to that, how far
you can go there, because the members of the polis have a natural interest in their living
on as the polis and therefore they must make concessions to the vicious enemy in their
procedure. I think you see it every day in foreign affairs particularly: how the more unjust
or the more wicked dictates, in a way, to the less wicked. Yes?
Same Student: If then, you can say that no act is simply and intrinsically unjust, any
act . . .
LS: No, no, they are intrinsically unjust. But they presuppose a certain normality of the
situation.
Same Student: Well, is that the same case in the rest of the virtues, the things that seem
to be intrinsically immoderate or illiberal, are they just understood in terms of . . .
LS: They are also changeable. Think of a man who is very liberal hitherto, and a model
of liberality. Then he loses all his fortune without any fault of his [own]. His liberality
looks very different after his failure than before.
Same Student: But it seems as though, in the case of those virtues if a man loses his
ability to become liberal or he in fact doesn’t know how to act liberally in this . . .
LS: But, I mean, in a wider sense of the word, he can be liberal. Two beggars: one of
them can be liberal, and the other is illiberal. But of course that is not noticeable to the
unarmed eye, so to speak, whereas the normal liberal cannot be a beggar. We know that.
But still, there is a very great changeability there. There are certain things which can be
said, as Aristotle says, which can be said in general. He is trying to say these in the
Ethics, but they are all subject to qualifications. Aristotle had spoken in the first book
about the peculiar character of the kind of knowledge which he sets forth in this book.
You remember that he spoke three times of that: there is a great perplexity, confusion in
these things, but not so great that one can say [that] all this is merely convention or, as
they would say today, merely culture-bound: culture A dictates this, culture B dictates
xvii

There is a break in the tape here.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

372

that, and it doesn’t make any difference. No, lines are discernible, but it is impossible that
these things should be unchangeable. The distinction between justice and injustice,
between a good and evil man, remains, but what he will do and how he will act will differ
and may differ very deeply. Mr. Fairbanks?xviii
Student: Could I return to the situation of the two men on the shipwreck? Were you
trying to say that in that situation, according to Aristotle, it could be called just for the
one man to push the other man off? Or would you say that it is a situation in which the
consideration of justice is irrelevant to what they do?
LS: Aristotle, I believe, would say it is not unjust. This is not quite the same as to say it is
just.
Same Student: Unless you say it’s just, then it seems that you can’t say what he thinks,
that the natural . . .
LS: He doesn’t give that example . . .
Same Student: . . . because in that situation it seems that the naturally just doesn’t really
have any force, because no matter what you think about it, it doesn’t really tell you . . .
LS: But you must remember that the case of the two men on the plank is an exception,
and in most cases, fortunately, normality prevails. You only have to think of what
happens in the case of a plague or war or so on, how many people who were tolerably
decent cease to be tolerably decent in such a situation. This of course is not what
Aristotle means, but only to see that the change is radical that is brought about by the
transition from a normal situation. And think only of what kind of things become [. . .] to
put it this way, when done against a beastly government. If one wants to have the other
view, the one hundred percent moral view, then one also has to go to the length of this
argument and say that [. . .] resistance against the government, rebellion against the
government, is under all circumstances an unjust action. Kant is surely consistent here,
and things become very simple then. The argument is characteristic: no revolution
without previous conspiracy—and no conspiracy without lying, because the cop at the
corner might ask you where are you going now, and if you would say truthfully that now
we go to a conspiratorial session, that would be very moral but of course incompatible
with your goal. Therefore no revolution without lying; and lying is under all
circumstances immoral. But Aristotle would not go so far. He would preserve a certain
flexibility without which human life altogether is not possible, and this has indeed these
great consequences.
Student: Is the relationship between the philosopher and the city a normal or abnormal
situation?

xviii

The audio recording ends here. The remainder of the transcript of this session is taken from
the original transcript. Ellipses in the original transcript have been preserved. Where the
transcriber noted “inaudible,” ellipses appear in square brackets.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 20

373

LS: I believe for Aristotle it is rather abnormal, because when he speaks of the parts of
the polis in the Politics, he does not mention the philosopher. But surely one can say that
is a rather one-sided statement. One can show without too great a difficulty that the polis
needs the philosophers. Aristotle could never have written his Politics if he had not
believed that.
Student: Previously you dismissed the examples of the Rhetoric as belonging to a
particular circumstance: the argument given for acquittal in front of a law court. Now in
terms of this new interpretation you have given, it begins to make a little better sense.
LS: I’m sorry, because if we take the [. . .] example, it is because universal law, natural
law forbids the eating of animals, i.e., only vegetarianism is in accordance with natural
right. Aristotle rejects that.
Student: Is that the example?
LS: That’s one of the things.
Student: The eating of animals.
LS: Yes. So these examples which we can [. . .] from this passage make sense, namely,
that the city has an obligation to help those citizens who have come into misfortune by
serving the city. Does it not make sense?
Student: Yes, but I can’t understand the third example, even with the example given in
the Ethics that the man who is like his god is as extraordinary as the slave [. . .]
LS: Yes, I think that’s the purpose, why he speaks of that in the Rhetoric. I see our time
is up. We will continue with this next time. I’m inclined to believe that an important
ingredient of what Aristotle had in mind about natural right was brought out in a
medieval tradition, rather [more] Islamic and Jewish than Christian, according to which
natural right comprises the evident minimum conditions of the polis; therefore every polis
must fulfill them with the qualifications as stated, and therefore from this point of view
positive law would be something higher than natural right because it is more than the
minimum conditions. But whether this is a feasible thought, we must see.
1
2

Deleted “who.”
Deleted “I do not believe that this will—they are even in.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

374

Session 21: May 6, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] . . . it’s not devoted, as you find out soon, to theoretical
wisdom but rather to practical wisdom, to prudence, and only in order to make clear what
practical prudence is does he discuss wisdom. In other words, the rule that what is in the
center is most important cannot be always applied, and surely not in the case of Aristotle.
In the case of Plato, it’s somewhat different.
Student: . . . have a sense . . . making a slight gesture—
LS: Yes, well, I mean, I do not blame you for it, but I only use this occasion to give you a
friendly warning. There are some more things. i “Aristotle limits the need for political
philosophy, but in a way very different from some later thinkers. The phronēsis-directed
ethics that is the basis of Aristotle’s Politics is hardly comparable to the a-teleological
modern political sciences. Aristotle limited political questions by limiting the ‘why’ to
the practical sphere as much as possible. Modern nonphilosophic science, or as Comte
calls it, positive philosophy, eliminates the ‘why’ altogether and substitutes a mere
‘how.’” That was at least Comte’s claim. But what happens to political philosophy in
Comte, as distinguished from his present-day successors? [That] might be worth
considering for a moment, to see how much has changed and how rapidly things have
changed in the last hundred years. Well, for Comte political philosophy is of course
absolutely indispensable, and it is in no way an arbitrary matter depending on arbitrary
value judgments of himself as an individual. Whether his ethics is sound or deep, that’s
another matter, but for him it is clear that there are principles of preference which are in
no way arbitrary and which are universally valid.
Now Mr. Long . . . Long. “One does take counsel,” you say, “about virtue, as it is a
matter of habitation.” You mean “of habituation,” but how do you do that?
Student: How do you seek counsel?
LS: I mean, if you take counsel about virtue. And how far is this taking counsel
connected with virtue being a matter of habituation?
Same Student: You take counsel as to the action . . . to perform . . . the right
decision . . .
LS: Yes, but a concrete question: you need money, and there are virtuous and
nonvirtuous means for getting money. How do you deliberate?
Same Student: You would take the virtuous [means].
LS: So you do not deliberate. In other words, virtue doesn’t fall under deliberation at all.
Yes, I think that is what Aristotle means, so there must be something wrong in what you
i

Strauss responds to students’ papers.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

375

have said. Virtue guides our deliberation by, as it were, a priori excluding indecent
means, but it is not itself an object of deliberation. I think I’ll leave it at this.1
And now let us turn, or return after such a long interruption, to the fifth book of the
Ethics. Now let us remind ourselves of some of the most general things.2 Aristotle’s
inquiry in this book here is, as he has said right at the beginning, “a kind of” political
inquiry. It deals with the foundations of politics but also with the limitations of politics.
And therefore it contains an intimation of what transcends politics, and therefore it is no
longer properly and strictly political. To the extent, however, that the Ethics is simply a
political book, book 5 is its most important part, the peak, because its subject is justice.
And justice, as we have learned, is the whole of virtue directed toward another human
being, toward a neighbor; and virtue in this relation to the neighbor is higher than the
virtue understood only as a perfection of the individual. Yet there is this difficulty:
towards the other, towards the neighbor, has also another aspect, an aspect with which
Aristotle deals when speaking of particular justice. You remember the passage at the end
of book 4—it won’t do any harm if we read it again. Do you have it? That is 1128b21.
“The gentleman.”
Reader: Oh, yes.
For indeed the virtuous man does not feel shame, if shame is the feeling caused by base
actions; since one ought not to do base actions (the distinction between acts really
shameful and those reputed to be so is immaterial, since one ought not to do either), and
so one never ought to feel shame. Shame is a mark of a base man, and springs from a
character capable of doing a shameful act. And it is absurd that, because a man is of such
a nature that he is ashamed if he does a shameful act, he should therefore think himself
virtuous, since actions to cause shame must be voluntary, but a virtuous man will never
voluntarily do a base action.
LS: Yes. Now this was as it were the grand finale of the previous discussion and tacit
transition to the discussion of justice in book 5, because now we hear something very
different. Turn to 1131b32 following.
Reader:
But the just in private transactions, although it is the equal in a sense (and the unjust the
unequal), is not the equal according to geometrical but according to arithmetical
proportion. For it makes no difference whether a good man has defrauded a bad man or a
bad one a good one, nor whether it is a good or a bad man that has committed adultery—
(1131b21-1132a4)
LS: And so on. The word for good man here, epieikēs, is the same as that used at the end
of book 4. 1134a17?
Reader:
But seeing that a man may commit injustice without actually being unjust, what is it that
distinguishes those unjust acts the commission of which renders a man actually unjust
under one of the various forms of injustice, for example, a thief or an adulterer or a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

376

brigand? Or shall we rather say that the distinction does not lie in the quality of the act?
For a man may have intercourse with a woman knowing who she is, yet not from the
motive of deliberate choice, but under the influence of passion; in such a case, though he
has committed injustice, he is not an unjust man: for instance, he is not a thief, though
guilty of theft, not an adulterer, though he has committed adultery, and so forth.
(1134a17-23)
LS: So let us stop here. So here Aristotle draws a very different conclusion from the fact
that justice is toward the other. The first conclusion was: justice is toward the other, and
therefore more difficult than the other virtues, and therefore higher. Now justice is toward
the other and therefore more external than the other virtues, so that the difference which
otherwise would be very important between the noble and the base character becomes
unimportant, and we consider only the act in itself: is it a crime or not criminal?
Naturally, this must be properly understood. In one sense justice is external, as we have
seen. But true justice, full justice is not merely external. That is indicated by this very
question. I mean, the man who is a just man and not merely a man acting justly will obey
the law in the right spirit.
Now Aristotle proceeds from here generally in the following manner. He has established
the fact that an unjust man and a transgressor, as we might perhaps translate—in Greek
the two words are very close, adikos, “unjust,” adikon, “the man who acts unjustly.” Let
us say “transgressor.” In order to clarify3 [this distinction], we must know what is the
unjust man, and therefore what is the just man, i.e., who is the just man par excellence,
the just man simply? And that is the same as the man who is just in the political sense of
the word. The politically just. And then in a passage which we read last time, 1134a30,
“for justice.” Yes?
Reader:
For justice can only exist between those whose mutual relations are regulated by law.
(1134a30)
LS: Ya. So the sphere of the politically just is identical with the sphere of the nomos, of
the law. This might lead us to think that all just [things], everything just is so through
nomos: nothing that is just is just by nature. This subject is taken up by Aristotle in the
immediate sequel, where we were interrupted last time. We discussed briefly the section
in the Rhetoric, book 1, chapter 13; I do not have to repeat that. And we turn now
immediately to the next chapter, where we left off. The point where we begin again is
1134b24. Only one word of summary. What is by nature just, Aristotle says, has
everywhere the same force, in Greece as well as in Persia. He says “everywhere” where
we would say “always,” and this shows an interesting difference between our way of
looking at things and the Greek way of looking at things. Our way of looking at things is
much more historical. We are much more impressed by historical change. For the Greeks,
the simultaneous differences, the coexisting differences, are more impressive, the reason
being that you can know this by your own observation, just by travelling. By travelling
from here to Mexico, you see difference of customs, but about the difference between,

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

377

say, Maya culture and present-day Mexico, this you do not know by your own
observation but through hearsay mediated by archaeologists and so on and so on.
So the natural just has everywhere—that means also always—the same force. And it has
this force not owing to human fiat, whereas positive law owes its force entirely to human
fiat. Now examples seem to be worshiping the gods and similar matters. More generally
stated, the fundamental requirements of any political life, anywhere on earth. But
Aristotle now makes this surprising remark: although there is something which is just
intrinsically, by nature and independent of human fiat, everything just, natural or
conventional, is changeable. Now let us read on in b24. “Some think that everything just
is of this nature.”
Reader:
Some people think that all just things are conventional, because whereas a thing by nature
is immutable and has the same power everywhere, as fire burns both here and in Persia,
just things are seen to differ. ii
LS: “Seen to change,” “to undergo change.”
Reader:
This is not so, but it is true in a way. iii Among the gods, indeed, it is perhaps not true at
all; but in our world, although there is such a thing by nature iv, all—
LS: Meaning something just by nature, that is understood. Yes?
Reader:
all is changeable. But nevertheless there is something by nature just, as well as not
ordained by nature, and it is clear which sort of justice, though not absolute, is natural,
and which is not natural but conventional and by agreement, both sorts alike being
changeable.v (1134b24-33)
LS: Now is this clear, as Aristotle so quietly asserts? Perhaps not quite. Perhaps we can
say this much: the difference between the natural and the conventionally just lies not in
the unchangeability on the one side and the changeability on the other—this Aristotle has
abandoned—but in the independence of human fiat in the one case, and the dependence

ii

In Rackham’s translation: “Some people think that all rules of justice are merely conventional,
because whereas a law of nature is immutable and has the same validity everywhere, as fire burns
both here and in Persia, rules of justice are seen to vary.”
iii
In Rackham’s translation: “That rules of justice vary is not absolutely true, but only with
qualifications.”
iv
In Rackham’s translation: “such a thing as Natural Justice.”
v
In Rackham’s translation: “all rules of justice are variable. But nevertheless there is such a thing
as Natural Justice as well as justice not ordained by nature; and it is easy to see which rules of
justice, though not absolute, are natural, and which are not natural but legal and conventional,
both sorts alike being variable.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

378

on human fiat on the other. This I think we can safely say without going beyond the text.
Do you have some troubles?
Student: Yes, I do not understand one word—
LS: Fiat? Do you say “fee-at”? Well, I try to make a concession to English. I never know
which concessions are demanded and which not. Fiat, ya. Good. Thank you. Now
perhaps the passage is truly clear and Aristotle is right, although at first glance it seems to
be so difficult. Now go on.
Reader:
The same distinction will hold good in all other matters; for instance, the right hand is by
naturevi stronger than the left, yet it is possible for any man to make himself
ambidextrous.
LS: Ya. Whether this is meant to be a strict parallel or only some loose illustration is hard
to say. The right hand is by nature stronger than the left. This is directed against the thesis
of Plato in the Laws, 794d following. Plato asserts that the right hand is not by nature
stronger, that it is merely a habit; just as in the Republic he says [that] the difference
between men and women is not so important as people say, criticizing habit there too.
And Aristotle [regards] habit as much more natural, at least the universal habit as much
more natural, than Plato does. Now the right hand is by nature stronger, and yet men may
make themselves ambidextrous. Now what does this mean, if we apply it to the question
here discussed? Then it would mean ambidexterity corresponds to the legal justice as
distinguished from natural justice. Should this mean that the legal justice is a
deteriorating addition to what is by nature just? This seems to be impossible, because
why should we make a deteriorating addition to something which is good enough in
itself? So maybe the legal right or legal justice is an improving supplement of the natural
right. In this case natural and positive right together (corresponding to ambidexterity)
would be higher than natural right by itself (corresponding to natural right-handedness).
Do you have any suggestions regarding this? Well, I trust you will interrupt. Now let us
then continue first and complete this chapter.
Reader:
The justice based upon agreement and expediency is like standard measures. Corn and
wine measures are not equal in all places, but are larger in wholesale and smaller in retail
markets. Similarly the justice ordained not by nature but by man is not the same in all
places, because regimes are not the same. Though in all places there is only one regime
that is natural, the best.vii (1134b33-1135a5)
vi

In Rackham’s translation: “naturally.”
In Rackham’s translation: “The rules of justice based on convention and expediency are like
standard measures. Corn and wine measures are not equal in all places, but are larger in wholesale
and smaller in retail markets. Similarly the rules of justice ordained not by nature but by man are
not the same in all places, since forms of government are not the same, though in all places there
is only one form of government that is natural, namely, the best form.”
vii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

379

LS: “That is according to nature the best.” So first of all, Aristotle says that the
conventional or human right things differ according to convenience, and therefore there is
no intrinsic principle of right involved. The example he gives is clear enough. But this
does not mean that human right, the right established by men, that these things are
altogether conventional, for laws depend on regimes: democratic laws differ from
oligarchic laws, and so on and so on. Now the difference of regimes in its turn points to
the best regime, and the best regime is everywhere by nature the best. Aristotle does not
go here into the question whether in the best regime there would be any laws and not
perhaps the absolute rule of one superior man. He doesn’t open that. The point which he
is eager to make is that there is a kind of ceiling higher than all positive laws, and this
ceiling is natural. One could say, perhaps, with a view to the point I made last time, that
there is a flooring which is natural—the minimum conditions of civilized life—and a
ceiling which is natural, and in between there is a great variety of partly reasonable and
partly unreasonable arrangements. You see, Aristotle doesn’t say of the best regime that
it is everywhere just: he says it is everywhere best. That makes a great difference.
The authentic commentary on this passage you find at the end of book 3 of the Politics,
where Aristotle indicates which kind of regime is by nature best for which kind of
society. For these different kinds of societies, different regimes are just. But it is perfectly
possible to raise the question: which of these regimes, equally just in its place or time, is
simply preferable from the point of view of human excellence? One can say that this is a
difference between Aristotle and doctrinairist doctrines. The doctrinairist political
doctrine is one which asserts that there is one and only one regime which is just
everywhere or at all times. Aristotle would of course deny that, but this does not lead to
the consequence of simple relativism, because while justice is of great variety in this
respect, bestness or goodness is not.
We have not taken up a question which must have been present to more than one of you.
Aristotle has spoken here in this chapter so briefly and cryptically on natural law shortly
after he had discussed commutative and distributive justice. What is the relation of the
principles of commutative and distributive justice to natural right? Are these principles
not natural right? What else should be natural right, if not these principles? There is no
explicit reference to that, perhaps because Aristotle takes it for granted that we would put
two and two together. I hope he is not disappointed. But even if it is so, even if it is so
that the principles of commutative and distributive justice as such are principles of
natural right, they still would be changeable according to the explicit statement made in
the chapter just read, for the reason that there are situations in which it is simply not
feasible to do what is intrinsically right because of emergencies of one kind or another.
Now—yes?
Student: For Averroes, it seems to be the floor; it doesn’t seem to be the ceiling. I was
wondering if you’d comment a little bit on the difference between Averroes on the one
hand, Thomas on the other hand, and whether Averroes is a correct interpreter of
Aristotle.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

380

LS: That is very hard to say. One can say one point. Thomas solves the difficulty by
making a distinction between the principles of natural right, the highest principles, which
are unchangeable, and the secondary conclusions or determinations, whatever they may
be, which are changeable. This distinction is not contradicted by Aristotle, but it does not
have a basis in Aristotle. Now the Averroistic tradition accepts the changeability of all
natural right. The clearest statement, in the Western tradition at least, is probably that by
Marsilius of Padua in the Defender of the Peace. I quote from memory; what Marsilius
says is this: that there are certain principles universally accepted by all societies, and
divine worship is one of these. And they are however not rational principles, properly
speaking, but generally accepted. viii In Greek it would be endoxa. This is, I think, the
Averroistic view. And this is not natural right, because natural right proper would be
rational right. And so Marsilius’s argument is about this: what is rational is not
universally accepted, and what is universally accepted is not rational; and therefore he
turns this against the Thomistic notion of natural law without mentioning Thomas
. . . This is all I can say at the moment. Mr. Wedergreen?
Student: As I understand it, you’re saying that there’s a sphere of politics which is
somehow between the naturally right and the naturally good, or best . . . But somehow
these are different things, that what’s naturally just is different from what’s naturally
good.
LS: I didn’t mean it in this way, but you could say it, yes. Go on, draw your—go on with
that.
Same Student: Actually, I didn’t draw any conclusion . . .
LS: I see. By the way, I spoke of a flooring beneath which you would not find any
political life, and a ceiling beyond which political life cannot possibly go. And even
perhaps more precisely: this ceiling is already beyond politics proper, so that all politics
moves between these two limits and has a standard of its excellence or opposite in the
best regime [and] can be judged accordingly.
Same Student: But it would seem to me that, say, if you’re talking about good things or
the bes things, that you’d have to say good for what or best for what.
LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: And that seems to bring about a problem if you’re talking about politics.
I could see maybe if you’re talking about something else, but if you’re talking about
politics and, say, mixing the minimum conditions for human political life which, say,
would be something more than the city of pigs, or close to that, and the maximum
conditions for some—for human life, for good. I mean, I don’t see what happens, say, to
justice when you get to the best because you’re not—as you say, you’re not talking about
political life anymore.
viii

Cf. the discussion of Marsilius in Leo Strauss, “Marsilius of Padua,” in Liberalism Ancient and
Modern (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1968), 185-202.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

381

LS: But the question is whether there is not a dialectics in politics which leads beyond
politics, so that what politics is after cannot be fulfilled by political means any more; and
therefore a kind of dilution of what politics primarily intends is not essential for human
life.
Same Student: But how does that ceiling, as you put it, how can that participate in
politics? How can it have anything to do with it?
LS: Perhaps the two thoughts belong to two different processes of the argument. We
constantly are compelled to judge of political things, and not only of individuals and
individual measures or individual laws but of political orders as a whole. I mean, think of
the present day: who can prevent himself from trying to form a judgment about the
relative merits of liberal democracy on the one hand, and communism on the other? Or
alternatives which are less striking but which are at least potentially there?
So this question of what is better points to the question of what is simply good. That is
one clear argument leading up to the question: what is the best regime? And now when
you try to elaborate that and take the most extreme view, and the most radical, as Plato
did in the Republic, then you arrive at these well-known conclusions about which seems
to be the perfect regime, but of which one can rightly wonder, not only from Aristotle’s
point of view but from Plato’s own point of view: is this still a polis? Now then of course
one must say: All right, let us then correct the mistake and let us not abstract from the
many things from which Plato abstracts in the Republic and arrive at something like the
best regime of Plato’s Laws or, for that matter, the best regime of Aristotle’s Politics:
books 7 and 8, which are not so enormously different from each other. This you can do.
Whether this is sufficient, and whether the difference, however small, between the best
regime of the Laws and the best regime of books 7 and 8 of the Politics does not lead to a
further questioning of this whole notion of the best regime, that’s a long question. But the
prima facie reasonableness of the question cannot be denied, and it is in a way borne out
practically by the fact that most people concerned with politics have definite views of
what is the best regime. A liberal and a conservative differ greatly, but still they have
each an overall view of what the best interpretation, say, of the American Constitution is.
Now we have to raise a further question, after having read the section on natural right.
What is the meaning of the discussion of natural right in our context? Now the context is
this. We are trying to understand the difference between the unjust man, the adikos, and
the transgressor, the adikon. You can compare it, if you want, with the difference
between a mortal and a venial sinner, to bring it somewhat closer to notions which are
familiar to you. Let us assume that it belongs to the natural right to worship the gods,
while sacrificing one goat or two sheep belongs to the human or conventional right. Now
a man who sacrifices two sheep although it is now the law to sacrifice a single goat is a
transgressor. A man who sacrifices one sheep when it is the law to sacrifice two sheep is
also a transgressor, although not an unjust man because he has observed the principle of
worship of the gods. But assuming that he doesn’t sacrifice anything, would he then
become an unjust man? That is a hard question. We do not have sufficient evidence of

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

382

how Aristotle would decide this case. We have to take a somewhat broader approach if
we try to understand this section here, what we read and what we are going to read,
because there are many unclear transitions and repetitions. Yes?
Student: In reference to a passage that you went over just before you went into the
section about natural right, there was an example given of an adulterer and—well, of a
thief and an adulterer. Now he makes the point that the origin of this act might not be
deliberate, but passionate . . . won’t be. The implication of it—as I understand it, there are
two implications: number one, that an act that’s committed out of passion may not be an
unjust [one] to the extent that—in all other instances a man may be a perfectly just man
or he may be—justice springs from his soul except when his passions take over. And so
in a sense, you might say that he is excusable—well, not excusable; there is an excuse
which can be made to the extent that he’s a just man who just happens to be an
unhappy . . . On the other hand, there’s a parallel here too: the passionate act isn’t
excusable, it’s one which a man needs to be held accountable for to the extent that he’s
either just or unjust. Now I also wanted to ask here, that there seems to be a contradiction,
because, I mean, how can a man who commits an unjust act at one point, even though he
is just in his, you might say, his lifestyle for the most part, be a just man altogether? I
mean, there is an element of injustice there. He cannot be called a just man; he cannot be
called an unjust man. So I suppose there’s a mean there.
LS: Yes, that is intelligible that you have this doubt. But we are trying to understand
Aristotle, and Aristotle does not agree with you there. But I do not know; the passage is
too brief. We have to use our own knowledge of literature or maybe of life in order to see
what Aristotle is thinking about. Now clearly, if someone is suddenly overcome by a
passion for another man’s wife and seduces her—because it is not a matter of rape; that is
an extreme case. But there are all kinds of in-between cases.
Same Student: Well, I was thinking that simply taking this case as a kind of model, you
know—could the just man in all other aspects . . .
LS: But we have to go into some details in order to see that it is not so simple as you
seem to present it. Now let us assume that the woman in question is the wife of a friend.
The friend is in another part of the planet. And she needs badly his help and in a business
matter of grave importance which must be discussed privately, in utmost secrecy. Things
may develop [laughter] . . . very hard, very hard—I mean, I don’t wish to excuse anyone,
but I must only say that it is very hard to condemn so strictly as in the case of a ruthless,
consciousless seducer. You know? All kinds of situations are thinkable, oh yes, and we
have to take them into consideration.
Same Student: . . . not to carry it on any longer than [laughter] . . . That’s that’s—
LS: Think of this man, think of a man circumstanced like the one I described: a loyal
friend and everything else. And think of her, and can you say then he has ceased to be an
honest man by this action? You take a great responsibility in making this judgment.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

383

Same Student: What I was asking is, when there are circumstances like these, where
there are various shades of gray and all that kind of thing, that’s granted. But the question
that I’m asking is: where does the man fall? A just man normally, who commits, say, in
his own eyes an unjust act and becomes unjust after the fact, be that as it may.
Nonetheless, there’s the element of injustice there. Now you can’t call a just man who
commits an unjust act a just man.
LS: That is what Aristotle says. That is exactly what he says. He says that—
Same Student: . . . that isn’t the implication of this passage here—
LS: Surely. Or if this example is somewhat indelicate, take the example of the man who
has stolen and is not a thief. Now if you take it very literally in the present-day meaning
of the word stealing, you will say: a man who steals is of course a thief. But in Greek, the
word klepton has a broader meaning. Any abstraction of . . . Now if Phidias took this
money, this gold, for another purpose than the purpose for which it was assigned by the
Athenian assembly, was he [a thief]? I mean, he may have committed an illegal act. He
has to pay it back and maybe he has to go to jail. But is he a thief for this reason? It’s a
difficult question. The problem raised by Aristotle cannot be avoided, and that is of
course also underlying in a very general way what he says about natural right: that it is
changeable because of the enormous changeability in human conditions. But as I have
said on more than one occasion, for Aristotle that doesn’t do away with the moral
distinctions as such. On the contrary: this whole casuistry presupposes that there are very
firm principles in the light of which we judge. Yes?
Student: Could the perfectly wise man . . . whether this man was just or unjust?
LS: I suppose he would have to know the circumstances in the greatest possible detail
before he would judge.
Same Student: But . . . practical . . .
LS: But there are borderline cases where even the individuals immediately concerned
cannot possibly know where the line was transgressed.
Same Student: This would be a practical as opposed to a theoretical problem, then?
LS: As I said on a former occasion, it is all practical. All right. Now in order to facilitate
the understanding of the sequel (and partly retroactively also of what we have read
before), we have to reconsider for a moment again the overall context, and that is this
question: the difference between the unjust man and the transgressor or occasional
transgressor. This has something to do with the externality of justice. In the case of
commutative and punitive justice, we abstract altogether from the character of the doer,
as Aristotle says—not necessarily in reaching judgment on him. For example, that may
be very important; we don’t know, did he do it or did he not? The question is: could he
have done it or not? And then of course his prehistory would come up. But this is not

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

384

now the question with which we are concerned. If we know he has done it, regardless of
whether he was previously a nice or non-nice man, he will be punished in the same way.
One may act justly in an unjust spirit—for example, one may do the right thing merely
from fear of punishment—and one may act unjustly in a just spirit, as this man with
whom you find fault did, because he did not have the bad intention. Furthermore, a point
which Aristotle will make in the sequel which is also connected with the peculiar
problem of justice, [a] principle known from Roman law: volenti non fit injuria, no
injustice is done to him who agrees, who wills. Now this seems to threaten the objectivity
of justice. A certain bad action is committed, but then the4 [person] to whom it is done
has agreed to it, and therefore here it has ceased to be a bad action. We come to that very
soon.
Now one can perhaps find parallels to this former difficulty, at least, in the case of the
other virtues as well. Still, to say the least, this kind of discussion is given by Aristotle
only in book 5, only in the discussion of justice. So it must be presumed that there is a
particularly close connection between these difficulties and justice. Now it is very easy to
say: “Well, Aristotle is speaking here about legal questions,” because then the question
arises: what is law? Do you know that? Then we would have to become merely
tautological. The sphere in which the distinction between the external acts and the
intentions is of such special importance as it is not in the case of the other virtues. That
won’t help. So we have to go back to the main subject: justice. What is justice? And then
we get the answer, which we have to see from the beginning of this book: the virtue
toward the other.
Now let us first turn to book 10, to a few passages in book 10, 1177a27. Aristotle is
speaking here about the difference between the two kinds of happiness or ways of life:
the theoretical and the practical. Yes?
Reader:
Also the activity of contemplation will be found to possess in the highest degree the
quality that is termed self-sufficiency; for while it is true that the wise man equally with
the just man and the rest requires the necessaries of life, yet, these being adequately
supplied, whereas the just man needs other persons toward whom or with whose aid he
may act justly, and so likewise do the temperate man and the brave man and the others,
the wise man on the contrary can also contemplate by himself, and the more so the wiser
he is; no doubt he will study better with the aid of fellow-workers, but still he is the most
self-sufficient of men. (1177a27-b1)
LS: Yes, let us stop here. So you see Aristotle distinguishes between two kinds of men,
one whom he calls the wise—wise not in the sense of practically wise, but theoretically
wise (sophos, in Greek); and the other he calls on the first occasion the just man, although
he means also the brave and the others. The just man is not self-sufficient; the just man
lives essentially with a view to others. Needless to say that this has nothing to do with the
notion of “other-directed” which is now in vogue. Now 1178a2 to 4. He speaks still of the
same general subject.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

385

Reader:
It may even be held that this is the true self of each, inasmuch as it is the dominant and
better part; and therefore it would be a strange thing if a man should choose to live not his
own life but the life of some other than himself.
LS: So the true self is the self engaged in contemplation. The moral man as moral man
has chosen not his own life but the life of somebody else. Two more short passages, a
little bit later, at the beginning of the next paragraph.
Reader:
The life of moral virtue, on the other hand, is happy only in a secondary degree. For the
moral activities are purely human: Justice, I mean, Courage and the other virtues we
display in our intercourse with our fellows— (1178a2-11)
LS: More literally, “We do these actions toward one another.” This is toward: the pros
heteron. Here, pros allēlous. Yes. And finally, b3 to 7.
Reader:
But the theoretical man,ix so far as the pursuit of his activity is concerned, needs no
external apparatus: on the contrary, worldly goods may almost be said to be a hindrance
to contemplation; though it is true that, being a man and living in the society of others, he
chooses to engage in virtuous action, and so will need external goods to carry on his life
as a human being. (1178b3-7)
LS: Yes. So justice: we see now here from this general remark at the end of the book that
the fact that justice is toward the other is not limited to justice. Justice reveals the
fundamental character of moral virtue in general as being directed towards other human
beings. All moral virtue is social in a way in which theoretical virtue is not social. And
we understand perhaps from here the strange feature of the discussion of courage in book
3, when Aristotle [is] presenting the truly courageous man as someone who is exposing
his life. We do not know exactly for what5—[it is] on the battlefield—but he is surely
distinguished from the citizen as citizen. Aristotle as it were conceals provisionally the
social character of moral virtue in order to bring it out with all the greater force at the end
of the book.
Now what I suggest, in brief, is this. The difficulties of book 5 of the Ethics, and to some
extent also of the other books, prepare in a way that is not always lucid the final demotion
of moral virtue at the end of the Ethics. And we would have to link up the specific
discussions with which we are now concerned about the voluntariness and
involuntariness of crime, for example, with this fundamental issue.
Now let us continue then where we left off, and this was where? 1135a6, I believe, or a5.
This is after the—we have just completed the discussion of natural right. Now he seems
to go over to something very different. Yes?
ix

In Rackham’s translation: “the student.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

386

Reader:
Each of the just and lawful thingsx are related to the actions conforming with them as
universals to particulars. For the actions done are many, while each rule or law is one,
being universal.
LS: Why does he say that here? In the sequel, he has not included this. Why does he
make this remark here? All just and lawful things, meaning regardless of whether they
are by nature just or by convention just, have the character of universality: permitting,
commanding, forbidding universally. The question we could have understood: the
relation of the natural law or natural right and positive right as that of universal to the
more particular, the natural law being the universal and the positive law as the particular.
I believe that this question is somehow present. Aristotle says not more indeed than just
this: universality applies to all law regardless of whether it is natural or positive. Yes?
Reader:
There is a difference between ‘that which is unjust’ and ‘unjust conduct,’ and between
‘that which is just’ and ‘just conduct.’ Nature or ordinance pronounces a thing unjust:
when that thing is done, it is ‘unjust conduct’; till it is done, it is only ‘unjust.’ And
similarly with ‘just conduct,’ dikaiōma (or more correctly, the general term is
dikaiopragēma, dikaiōma denoting the rectification of an act of injustice).
We shall have later to consider the several rules of justice and of law, and to enumerate
their various kinds and describe them and the things with which they deal.
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. Now here Aristotle gives an indication of the
difference between the unjust man and the mere transgressor. That difference does not lie
in that between natural right and conventional right, as it could have seemed on the basis
of earlier remarks, but that the injustice resides in the intention, in the will, as
distinguished from the external action. How did he put it here? “After it was done, it was
an unjust action. Before it was done, it was not an unjust action, but only something
unjust.” We do not have the same terminology, and Aristotle has to coin this terminology
himself, as you see from this occasional remark here.
Reader:
Such being an account of just and unjust actions, it is their voluntary performance that
constitutes just and unjust conduct. If a man does them involuntarily, he cannot be said to
act justly, or unjustly, except incidentally, in the sense that he does an act which happens
to be just or unjust. Whether therefore an action is or is not an act of injustice, or of
justice, depends on its voluntary or involuntary character. When it is voluntary, the agent
is blamed, and only in that case is the action an act of injustice; so that it is possible for
an act to be unjust without being an act of injustice, if the qualification of voluntariness
be absent. (1135a5-23)
LS: So the man who acts unjustly, the transgressor: [his action] must be voluntary.
Needless to say, the same is of course also true of the unjust man, but even in the case of
x

In Rackham’s translation: “The several rules of justice and of law.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

387

the transgressor, voluntariness is required. But Aristotle seems to say there may be
sometimes unjust acts without [voluntariness]xi being involved. What does he mean by
that? Let us see whether the sequel throws any light on it.
Reader:
By a voluntary action, as has been said before, I mean any action within the agent’s own
control which he performs knowingly, that is, without being in ignorance of the person
affected, the instrument employed, and the result (for example, he must know whom he
strikes, and with what weapon, and the effect of the blow); and in each of these respects
both accident and compulsion must be excluded. For instance, if A took hold of B’s hand
and with it struck C, B would not be a voluntary agent, since the act would not be in his
own control. Or again, a man may strike his father without knowing that it is his father—
LS: This of course is very important because father-beating is a much more serious
offense than just beating anyone. Yes?
Reader:
though aware that he is striking some person, and perhaps that it is one or other of
the persons present; and ignorance may be similarly defined with reference to the
result, and to the circumstances of the action generally. An involuntary act is
therefore an act done in ignorance, or else one that though not done in ignorance
is not in the agent’s control, or is done under compulsion; since there are many
natural processes too that we perform or undergo knowingly, though none of them
is either voluntary or involuntary; for example, growing old, and dying.
Also an act may be either just or unjust incidentally. A man may restore a deposit
unwillingly and from fear of consequences, and we must not then say that he does
a just act, nor that he acts justly, except incidentally; and similarly a man who
under compulsion and against his will fails to restore a deposit can only be said to
act unjustly or do what is unjust incidentally.
LS: Now let us stop here. This latter example may perhaps help us. There may be
sometimes unjust acts without voluntariness being involved. I think here is an example.
You do not return a deposit at the fixed time and therefore have to pay a particularly high
interest rate, and you were prevented from returning it by some people who kept you
prisoner. Now you clearly did not voluntarily fail to keep your promise, and nevertheless,
you are obliged: you have to suffer the penalty which was arranged when you made the
contract. This would be a case in which a man can commit an unjust act, a punishable act,
without any voluntariness. He has largely repeated, as we have seen, the long discussions
of the first book on voluntariness and involuntariness. Yes?
Reader:
Again voluntary acts are divided into acts done by choice and those done not by choice,
the former being those done after deliberation and the latter those done without previous
deliberation. (1135a23-b11)
xi

Strauss says “involuntariness,” apparently in error.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

388

LS: So Aristotle introduces now the somewhat higher consideration of choice or election
as distinguished from mere voluntariness. You remember the distinction? Voluntariness
is something which we share with the brutes, whereas election is something specifically
human. Yes?
Reader:
There are then three ways in which a man may injure his fellow. An injury done in
ignorance is an error, the person affected or the act or the instrument or the result being
other than the agent supposed; for example, he did not think to hit, or not with this
missile, or not this person, or not with this result, but it happened that either the result
was other than he expected (for instance he did not mean to inflict a wound but only a
prick), or the person, or the missile. When then the injury happens contrary to reasonable
expectation, it is a misadventure. When, though not contrary to reasonable expectation, it
is done without evil intent, it is a culpable error; for an error is culpable when the cause
of one’s ignorance lies in oneself, but only a misadventure when the cause lies outside
oneself. When an injury is done knowingly but not deliberately, it is an act of injustice or
wrong; such, for instance, are injuries done through anger, or any other unavoidable or
natural passion to which men are liable; since in committing these injuries and errors a
man acts unjustly, and his action is an act of injustice, but he is not ipso facto unjust or
wicked, for the injury was not done out of wickedness. When however an injury is done
from choice, the doer is unjust and wicked. Hence acts due to sudden anger are rightly
held not to be done of malice aforethought, for it is the man who gave the provocation
that began it, not he who does the deed in a fit of passion.
LS: Now that is a key practical decision: the man who kills from anger is a transgressor,
but not an unjust man. I think we understand this all immediately. Yes. Now he will
develop this a bit more in the sequel. Yes?
Reader:
And moreover the issue is not one of fact, but of justification (since it is apparent
injustice that arouses anger); the fact of the injury is not disputed (as it is in cases of
contract, where one or the other of the parties must be a knave, unless they dispute the
fact out of forgetfulness). They agree as to the facts but dispute on which side justice lies;
so that one thinks he has been unjustly treated and the other does not. On the other hand,
one who does an injury intentionally is not acting in ignorance; but if a man does an
injury of set purpose, he is guilty of injustice, and injustice of the sort that renders the
doer an unjust man, if it be an act that violates proportion or equality. Similarly one who
acts justly on purpose is a just man; but he acts justly only if he acts voluntarily.
(1135b11-1136a5)
LS: Now let us stop here for a moment. You are familiar with this question from Plato’s
Republic, in which the distinction between anger, spiritedness, on the one hand, and
desire on the other is such a crucial theme. xii And now we see here from Aristotle more
clearly than perhaps from Plato’s text what the solid practical basis for this fateful
xii

See Plato, Republic 439e-441b.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

389

distinction between anger and desire was. As Plato presents it, spiritedness is higher in
rank than desire, because spiritedness takes the side of reason against desire. And this is a
key point. Now this is an obviously wrong reasoning, as every one of you knows when
you have seen a child or grown-up who became angry from thwarted desire, where anger
takes the side of desire against reason. That is probably more common than the other.
And the whole argument of the Republic is really based on this point: that while it makes
sense to say that in the polis, the warrior, the fighting estate, is higher in rank than the
mere producers and the mere consumers, and therefore in this sense spiritedness is higher
than desire, of the individual it surely is not true. And the only proof which is really given
is that Glaucon when asked by Socrates says, “By Zeus, it is so,” which as we know is
not a proof.
But now what is the basis for the view that crimes committed from anger are less terrible
than crimes committed from desire? Well, proceeding quite empirically, we may proceed
as follows. We may raise the question as follows. What is the worst crime committed
from anger, ordinarily? Murder or homicide. And the worst crime committed from
desire?
Student: Adultery.
LS: Not necessarily. You don’t have to specify it: rape. Because adultery doesn’t have to
be rape, and so—
Student: What did you say it is?
LS: Rape.
Same Student: The worst crime committed from desire?
LS: From desire, yes, from desire as desire. Because adultery doesn’t have to be—
Same Student: Oh, I know, I know . . . I’m not arguing adultery is the worst crime
[laughter] . . .
LS: No, no one would suggest this.
Same Student: But rather that treason is the worst crime, that is to say—
LS: Yes, but is treason a crime essentially rooted in desire, in bodily desire? It could [be],
but ordinarily not.
Student: I’m not talking about treason against the state, I’m talking about against
those—doing harm to those who expect good from you: what Brutus did to Caesar, etc.,
etc.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

390

LS: You could call this crass ingratitude, yes. But on the other hand, there was also the
duty toward the republic, wasn’t there? It’s a complicated case. I was thinking of very
simple cases. Now in the case if someone says, “I admit I killed that man, but I did it
from anger,” this is generally regarded as an attenuating circumstance. But if someone
says, “I committed rape but I did it from lust,” that would not be regarded as an
attenuating circumstance. Now if you ascend from this simple fact to the principles
involved, you see that a case can be made for Plato’s and also therefore for Aristotle’s
view that crimes committed from anger are to be treated more mildly than crimes
committed from desire. Yes. Now let us continue. Will you read the end of this section?
Reader:
Of involuntary actions some are pardonable and some are not. Errors not merely
committed in ignorance but caused by ignorance are pardonable; those committed in
ignorance, but caused not by that ignorance but by unnatural or inhuman passion, are
unpardonable.
But it may perhaps be doubted whether our discussion of—
LS: We come to that next time. But what crimes does he have in mind? Ineffable crimes
which are unpardonable. I think at the beginning of book 7 you would find, perhaps—you
can read it at home, [in] 1148b19 following, terrible crimes which cause only disgust and
do not permit compassion to arise at all. Good. But let us nevertheless read the very
beginning, [so] that we see what we come up against now.
Reader:
But it may perhaps be doubted whether our discussion of suffering and doing injustice
has been sufficiently definite; and in the first place, whether the matter really is as
Euripides has put it in the strange lines—
‘I killed my mother—that’s the tale in brief!’
‘Were you both willing, or unwilling both?’ (1136a5-14)
LS: That is apparently another person in that lost tragedy, Orestes, meaning, was he, the
murderer—did he willingly kill his mother? And his mother obviously willing to be
killed. Now this new difficulty is this. Does not the act of committing an unjust act, or of
suffering an unjust act, depend on the unwillingness of the one who suffers the unjust act,
so, for example, that matricide, ordinarily regarded as one of the most terrible crimes, is
not a crime at all if the mother urges the son to kill her? These cases happen perhaps
more today because of the somewhat more loose notions prevailing than in former
times—well, from compassion, conceivably. Now if this is so, if even the most terrible
crimes cease to be crimes if they are done with the will of the sufferer, where does the
famous objectivity of justice come to? That is another question which in this form was
never raised regarding the other virtues, so that justice shows us the great problem of
morality more massively than the other virtues do, and thus prepares Aristotle’s final
finding: if you want to enter a sphere of perfect order and light and clarity, you must go

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 21

391

beyond the sphere of human action. So we leave it—is there any point you would like to
raise? We have a few minutes left. Yes?
Student: I was just curious to know if there was any difference, subtle or obvious,
between the discussion of voluntary and involuntary actions at the beginning of book 3
and the discussion of voluntariness in 1135a. It seemed almost as if the—
xiiiclarification—
LS: Surely it is a clarification, it is also of course a considerable complication which here
arises. And generally speaking one can say it is an ascent from the first statement to the
second statement: deeper into the problems, deeper into the entanglements, deeper into
the confusions. But surely Aristotle explicitly refers to the fact that he had mentioned
these things before, and he refers obviously to book 3, the beginning of book 3.6
1

Deleted “So this is Mr. Long. Again, Mr. Peterson. Can you give it to Mr.—you are Mr. Peterson? Can
you give it to him? Will you pass it on? And Mr. Simpson, Robert Simpson.”
2
LS: Is this a new—?
Students: He doesn’t know him. He misunderstood you. He doesn’t know Peterson. LS: Oh, I see.”
3
Deleted “so this distinction is clear.”
4
Deleted “action.”
5
Deleted “but.”
6
Deleted “Well, then let me repeat this, we will meet again this Wednesday and next week, and then this
will be the end of this class, and those of you who have not handed in their papers by the 29 th will be so
good as to come here on June 9th to undergo the final examination. Who will this be? How many? You.
Well, we will have a nice afternoon together. [Laughter.]”

xiii

There is a break in the tape at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

392

Session 22: May 20, 1968
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —now begin. First, there are a few papers which I’ll return
today. First, those which deal with the Ethics in general rather than with particular
sections. And I have here in front of me [a paper by] Mr. Middlestead, and there are a
few points which I would like to make. Now at the beginning you quote from Reinhold
Niebuhr a statement where a distinction is made between the ethical and the coercive
factors of human life. Is this distinction self-evident? I mean, which would mean the
ethical is in no way coercive, and the coercive is in no way ethical.
Student: I don’t think so.
LS: I mean, it’s not a matter of making you responsible for a statement of another man,
but it is simply [that] we should be interested in this kind of question.
Same Student: I think the point I was trying to make . . . related to the ethical and
coercive independent of each other . . .
LS: But still, that means of course that they are distinguished. That means the ethical as
ethical is in no way coercive.
Same Student: I don’t know if it means that.
LS: I suppose that Mr. Niebuhr means it that way—I haven’t read the book—otherwise
the coordination would not make sense. What would we have to think about this subject
on the basis of Aristotle, about this radical distinction between the ethical and coercive?
Another Student: Well, Aristotle wouldn’t have thought there was a . . . distinction
because, after all, action according to virtue is the result of the coercion of one part of the
soul over another part.
LS: Yes, at least to this extent coercion would . . . and this goes even beyond that.
Because we all have to go through a stage in which we are either mildly guided or mildly
coerced into the right way, and therefore—yes?
Another Student: Can you say that coercion is the same as habituation? I mean, in the
Republic, it’s more than just habituation, it’s a different type, more forceful or—
LS: A deeper goal, yes. One could say that. But on the other hand, also that to which we
are habituated is in many cases something which we like, and for which we long. You
know? I mean, for example, submission to authority on the part of children is not merely
a burden imposed on the children; it’s also a kind of support for the children which they
need and which they know1 [they] need. And therefore habituation is not simply
coercion.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

393

Student: Then it’s persuasion more than coercion.
LS: Ya, but if there is a felt need preceding the persuasion, then it cannot be reduced to
persuasion. “Illustrative of this contention is the thought that both democratic
governments such as that of the United States and more totalitarian regimes such as that
in the USSR aim ultimately at the creation of the conditions of happiness and differ only
as to the best methods to be employed.” This is frequently asserted, of course. But what
about the “only”? “Differ only as to the best methods to be employed.” Assuming that
both regimes have the same end, let us say the greatest happiness of the greatest number,
but there is a difference as to the means to be employed. You say “only.” Is this a
negligible thing?
Student: I guess . . . results . . .
LS: Yes, well, think of such actions as the mass murder of the kulaks under Stalin.
Same Student: Isn’t that a means, though?
LS: It should be a means! But the question is, what kind of a means?
Another Student: . . .
LS: Therefore the word “only” is questionable, and therefore I think one understands
from this point of view somewhat better what Aristotle says when he says that we
deliberate about the means, and whether we are good or bad shows itself in what means
we choose. You know?
Student: By saying “only” I didn’t mean that that wasn’t an important point.
LS: Yes, but I believe the primary meaning of “only” is just this, and therefore,
“prudence, which is the principal virtue in practical matters, is dependent on wisdom,
which is the principal virtue in speculative matters. Aristotle makes this explicit at the
point in book 6 where he classifies prudence as being the type of cleverness accompanied
by virtue in contradistinction to mere smartness, which also is of the genus cleverness,
but aims at a bad mark. This definition of the genus and species of practical wisdom
demonstrates the necessity of a clear view of the end if the application of the best means
is to constitute a prudent act.” Yes, but how do we get the clear view of the end,
according to Aristotle? You said, “Prudence, which is the principal virtue in practical
matters, is dependent on wisdom, which is the principal virtue in speculative matters.”
And this would seem to imply that we get the clear view of the end through wisdom;
through theoretical wisdom. Did Aristotle suggest this in the passage in book 6 to which
you refer?
Student: . . . I think he . . . deliberately . . . from virtue . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

394

LS: Yes, but is this not something very different from theoretical wisdom? Yes, whether
that is satisfactory, this answer, for Aristotle is another matter. Finally, that is also again,
if I may say so, a purely semantic point. But I have to watch that too. “All three types of
practical wisdom according to Thomas’s semantics are”—and so on and so on, namely,
domestic prudence, private prudence, and the political prudence. What is the meaning of
the word “semantics” here? If you make a distinction between cherries and strawberries,
is this a semantic distinction? Why then should the distinction between the household and
the city be a semantic distinction? I know there are people who would say all these
distinctions are semantic, but we don’t have to listen to them. [Laughter]
Now Mr. Cheener? Did I pronounce it incorrectly?
Student: In a sense, yes. [Laughter]
LS: How do you pronounce it?
Same Student: . . .
LS: Oh no, I could never do that. Is this Czech?
Same Student: Polish.
LS: Polish. Yes, well, you took a quite ambitious subject, but a reasonable one. I have a
few points. Mr. Cheener, if you will allow me. Mr. Cheener reconsidered the discussion
between Schaar, Wolin, and myself on behavioralism and Aristotle in the American
Political Science Review.i He gives first a summary of my assertions and then a summary
of the counterassertions of Schaar–Wolin. And then he takes a moderate view which is, I
believe, somewhat more favorable to me than to my enemies. [Laughter] Is this—
Same Student: You think it is? [Laughter]
LS: Well, you see, I was perfectly free from all malice, and my enemies were filled with
malice. You are perfectly free from malice, and so I thought we belonged together.
[Laughter.] Good. And now let us come to a few details. I had asserted [that] the new
political science rests on dogmatic atheism. “It is based on behavioral theories regarding
religion which exclude, without considering, the possibility that religion rests ultimately
on divine revelation. These theories can never be confirmed. Thus predictions of the new
political science about the future of societies are questionable.” I remember I said that.
But what about the “thus”? Why is this a consequence of that? “These behavioralist
doctrines are based on dogmatic atheism, hence their predictions about the future of
societies are fundamentally dogmatic and untrustworthy.” . . . on page 4.

i

John H. Schaar and Sheldon S. Wolin, “Essays on the Scientific Study of Politics: A Critique,”
American Political Science Review 57 (1963): 125-50; Herbert J. Storing, Leo Strauss, Walter
Berns, Leo Weinstein, and Robert Horwitz, “Replies to Schaar and Wolin,” American Political
Science Review 57 (1963): 151-60.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

395

Same Student: You’re asking why they are untrustworthy?
LS: The connection between the two assertions, that is what I’m interested in. I mean,
you render correctly what I said, but I wanted to see how much you understood it.
Same Student: Well, I think what you’re saying is that the statements of the new
political science may be valid to a certain degree or can be used tentatively, but they are
not predictions, they are not . . .
LS: But they are very much concerned with making predictions, especially people like
Lasswell. Now if there is a very important province, to put it mildly, which simply is not
being considered by them, then what are their predictions worth? But I would like to spell
this out in the case of the possibility of divine revelation. Well, obviously the future of
religion in the Western world and the world in general is a matter of the utmost
importance, wherever one stands. And we are confronted here with an entirely new
situation, as you see from the daily papers every day. Now predictions are implied in
almost every statement, I mean, however modest the statements may be phrased. But are
they not all based on the assumption that there is no God who can stop the process or can
begin it again in a wholly unforeseeable manner?
Same Student: I think most people assume that.
LS: These people, you believe, assume that?
Same Student: Well, these people not necessarily, but in the newspapers, say, when
someone predicts something, I think it’s something that just—that would be part of us
and we assume it can be so.
LS: All right. Perhaps we’ll leave it at that. There’s one more point. In defense of my
enemies, you say: “For the new political science, advising is indeed important. One only
has to look at the staggering amount of consulting done.” No one can question that. The
question was only, what is . . . the value? And secondly, is what is done by people who
are behavioristic political scientists, do they do this kind of thing in their capacity as
behavioristic political scientists or in their capacity as human beings with heads on their
shoulders? You know, a kind of purely accidental personal union between a man of
common sense and a man who also subscribes to the creed of behavioralism.
Same Student: I wasn’t making a statement on my own behalf, I was just paraphrasing
what Schaar and—
LS: Yes. No, no, that is all right. Now, Mr. Claytor?
Student: Here, sir.
LS: Now this is on a realist critique of Aristotle, which means a criticism of a realist
critique of Aristotle. The key point of this criticism is that Aristotle’s view is

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

396

fundamentally utopian and must be replaced by a realistic approach. You quote here a
French socialist: “It is an eternal dispute between those who imagine the world to suit
their policy and those who arrange their policy to suit the realities of the world.” ii Now
Aristotle would, according to the view of his enemies, belong to the utopians. You refer
to Marx and Hobbes, but especially (and rightly, I think) to Machiavelli. Now there are a
few points which we have to take up in this connection. Aristotle is assuming a certain
amount of reasonableness on the part of the listener, which must also be tempered by
actual experience gained through living. It is true then that in one sense Aristotle is both
theoretical and practical at the same time. But this does not make him yet as theoretical in
his Ethics as you claim. Do you see the point?
Same Student: Yes.
LS: “The Ethics is a handbook describing the ways and means of becoming a good man.”
Is this sufficient? Is this not even misleading? If you take only the part which we have
discussed more or less coherently hitherto, can this be said to be “a handbook describing
the ways and means of becoming a good man”? For example, what we are reading now
on justice, what we have been reading on courage or on magnanimity: does this describe
how one becomes a good man?
Same Student: I don’t think yet, because we haven’t really made the emphasis on, I
guess, the actual becoming; we just said—I don’t think—perhaps I was a little misleading
in using the verb “becoming” as far as—
LS: But that is very important, and it is not a minor matter. And why does Aristotle speak
relatively little about the ways and means of becoming a good man? He speaks of
something else. What is that something else in the first book?
Same Student: The way to be a good man. I mean—
LS: Exactly! That’s what he’s about all the time.
Same Student: . . . becoming good . . .
LS: Because how can you possibly say or teach anyone how to become good if you do
not know in the first place what it is to be good? So that’s clear. And there is no way of
avoiding this thing. And secondly, granted that after we know what it is to be a good man
we have to know how to become one: why is Aristotle so relatively brief about that?
Sam Student: Excuse me?
LS: Why is Aristotle so relatively brief about becoming a good man?

ii

Albert Sorel, L’Europe et la révolution française (huitième partie): La coalition, les traités de
1815 (1812-1815) (Paris: Plon, 1904), 474.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

397

Same Student: Well, I imagine because of the difficulty involved. And also, I guess, the
idea that related to that, it’s a long, long experience. He says at the very beginning, you
know, that he’s talking to people that have to gain this over a lifetime in the sense of
practical living and experiencing . . .
LS: Yes, but does this cause the difficulty of speaking about it? Of writing about that? I
mean, how does the whole process of becoming good start?
Same Student: By being good, I guess. By the activity of—
LS: Yes, but think of small children everywhere, I suppose by being told “Do” or
“Don’t,” and the children in most cases won’t be able to see why. They just do or don’t,
or maybe they transgress, and in this way certain habits are created, and on the basis of
these habits things look different than they did at the beginning: things which seem to be
very difficult become easy, and vice versa. And this process goes on for many years,
maybe through a lifetime. But there is not very much to say about it, except that
somehow we become aware [that] we ought to do this, and then we either do or do not do
the right thing. [The] psychology of the various obstacles is of no great interest to
Aristotle. That’s a case of pathological people, who cannot understand commands and
prohibitions and have therefore to be induced by very indirect means to behave. This I
believe is the point. Good.
“Machiavelli realizes, then, that Aristotle’s political philosophy in the Ethics attempted to
and actually claimed to achieve benefits for mankind. But based on a profound insight
into his times, Machiavelli saw a failure of this form of utopianism.” I emphasize the
expression, “into his times.” Do you see why I emphasize this?
Same Student: Because—right—I mean, because in a way it was a peculiar phenomenon
of what was happening around the breakup of the medieval—I mean, his times were a
partial, you know, in a sense you’re saying it was specific to his times, I mean, why he
had this insight. I mean, it was kind of . . .
LS: Does Machiavelli refer to his times in order to justify his criticism of Aristotle?
Same Student: I’m sure he does throughout the Prince. Doesn’t he talk about the citystates and the problem of Caesar or various people not doing this, and then doing this,
and then he does go back also to earlier examples, and—
LS: Yes, well, the Prince, to the extent to which this is a practical book written for a
prince around 1500, will of course deal with the situation around 1500 in Italy. But the
work as a whole, the Prince and the Discourses together, the whole attack, explicit or
implicit, of Aristotle, does this refer particularly to the times?
Another Student: The great examples he puts forth, the great founders are precisely out
of his times: Romulus, Moses, Theseus.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

398

LS: Yes.
Student: But wouldn’t it be a reflection of—well, I guess I didn’t really state this
explicitly, but wouldn’t it be a reflection of his mentality, you know, produced by his
times that would lead him to do this? . . . I guess I should have said that . . .
LS: Well, if I did not know that you are a very modest man, I would say you raise a very
immodest claim. I mean, you would have first to refute Machiavelli’s whole work, and
then you could raise the question—after having proven that Machiavelli was altogether
mistaken, then could you raise the question: why was he mistaken? How come that he
was mistaken? And then one possible answer might be: because as one born in this
particularly unfortunate epoch, he could not see certain things which we are so happy to
see with ease. But whatever one has to think about Machiavelli, Machiavelli did not
justify his proceedings by saying, “I’m a child of the Renaissance; this is the wave of the
future, now let us jump on that bandwagon,” but he started from substantive problems. I
mean, [for instance]: Is this a feasible moral–political teaching which is presented to us
by the philosophic–theoretical tradition? And if not, why not? But the fact that there is
such a thing like the Renaissance around was of no importance for Machiavelli himself.
Or differently stated: to explain Machiavelli in terms of the Renaissance, then you
presuppose you know what the Renaissance is. How do we know what the Renaissance
is? Partly through reading Machiavelli. A very closed circle. Maybe Machiavelli lived in
a period which for certain reasons of convenience we call the Renaissance and had very
little to do with it except that he followed the fashions of wearing his hair or combing his
hair, and so on and so on, but in no important respect.
One more passage. “Machiavelli’s critique has visibly collapsed. It is apparent then that
no political philosophy can be based on the singular concept of only observing what men
do and in no way commenting on what they ought to do.” Now this is a bit too simple. It
is based on the fact that Machiavelli, while claiming that he will proceed by how men do
live, nevertheless teaches men all the time how they ought to act. But this is so obvious,
and Machiavelli surely was aware of that. So if Machiavelli’s enterprise has visibly
collapsed, one has to adduce a better reason. What would be such a reason? I mean,
nothing hidden or subtle.
Student: A better reason I guess would be why what he said . . . ought to do . . . you
know, act on the same, you know, what he said they ought to do was in effect wrong, you
know, he said they ought to do this or that specifically—
LS: What did he say they ought to do?
Same Student: You know, a variety of different—you know, I mean, the different do’s
and don’ts that a prince should do in various circumstances, I mean—
LS: For example, to kill one’s sole brother, like Romulus killed Remus? Or what do you
mean? These kind of precepts—yes, but can one not find out the principle which is
directly opposed to the Platonic–Aristotelian principle? I believe one can. Because

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

399

Machiavelli says of course he wants to teach an “ought,” but an “ought” which is
feasible, which is possible among men and therefore which is not utopian, if we use this
expression. Now the Platonic–Aristotelian objective had this character, that it was an
“ought” regarding which one didn’t know whether it would ever become an “is.” And its
becoming an “is” depended entirely on chance, the clearest expression [being] Plato’s
statement in the Republic: the best regime will come into being if philosophy and
political power will coincide. A coincidence. Whether this coincidence will take place
can in no way be foreseen or predicted: it depends on chance. What does Machiavelli say
about chance?
Same Student: Well, I would guess he would say that . . . you know, we’re going to
eliminate the idea of chance and then . . .
LS: Yes. So in other words, the question is: is this true? Has the experience since
Machiavelli’s time shown that chance can be conquered?
Same Student: I’m afraid not. I mean, obviously it hasn’t. I mean, chance still is a
factor . . .
LS: Yes, and one could perhaps use some commonsensical arguments: that it is even
today impossible to predict who will be the next president of the United States, although
we have these wonderful methods of prediction and a few other things of this
kind . . . larger issues, like the Cold War and its future. Good.
And finally, Mr. Tangasay, who wrote a comparison of Aristotle’s Ethics and John
Dewey’s Human Nature and Conduct.iii Mr. Tangasay? Yes. Well, we discussed your
paper some time ago. Yes. Now Mr. Tangasay finds Aristotle and Dewey strikingly
similar. That’s at least what he says on some occasions, but he also sometimes uses
somewhat different language. But very briefly, what is the striking similarity between
these two so greatly different men? Dewey has spoken with great fervor and not without
some malice against Aristotle. And yet there is something in what you say, I gladly grant
that. Can you state it briefly to the class, what this—between Dewey and Aristotle.
Student: Well, it would seem to me that Dewey’s protest against Aristotle was—he said
Aristotle foisted a doctrine of ends upon Western intellectual history, and as a result most
of . . . of Aristotle . . . emphasized that present activity was only a means to achieve a
particular end. And Dewey emphasized that present activity mainly came from . . . in the
present. I spoke of what seemed to me to be a rather dynamic equilibrium model of
human nature there—
LS: Yes, well, this is an expression which is not quite intelligible. But what do you think
of this criticism of Aristotle by Dewey: that Aristotle does not find men’s happiness in
present activity?
iii

John Dewey, Human Nature and Conduct: An Introduction to Social Psychology (New York:
Henry Holt, 1922).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

400

Same Student: I think—my impression is that Dewey’s not altogether right in this
regard, that Aristotle emphasized present activity, certainly as a means to achieve the
goal of happiness, but that one had to . . .
LS: Yes, but what is happiness according to Aristotle?
Same Student: Happiness is present activity.
LS: I see. So what’s the difference?
Same Student: They were saying the same thing.
LS: So what’s the difference in this respect?
Same Student: Nothing.
LS: Yes, exactly. But obviously there is a very great difference between the two, and
where is this difference found if we disregard entirely the misunderstandings? According
to Dewey, the concept of the good could never be considered to be “out there,” or an
external aim fixed and secure for all time. That is one formulation which intimates the
difference. What is the true difference between the two men?
Same Student: Well, I tried—it’s very difficult to get a hold of. It would seem to be a
difference of emphasis between the two. Aristotle did emphasize the end, and Dewey
emphasized the present, and—
LS: Yes, but the end in this sense would be death, and Aristotle does not mean of course
death. He means life, and therefore present activity—not the present activity of a baby, or
for that matter of another immature human being, but the present activity of a grown-up
human being. This is what counts: whether he acts well or basely. And there is no end
somewhere hanging in the air, as some phrases of Dewey seemed to suggest. But I said
“grown-up human being.” The favorite expression of Dewey, if I remember well, is
“growth.” Now here we have perhaps something of a difference between Dewey and
Aristotle. What about growth?
Same Student: Well, I would think that Aristotle would emphasize that the child has to
grow, has to . . . grow, has to . . .
LS: Yes. But after.
Same Student: And Dewey would argue the same thing—
LS: Yes, well, but we do not always remain children, and then?
Same Student: Right. I suppose that Aristotle would emphasize that perhaps a man of
practical wisdom—men of reason could agree about certain standards or principles that a

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

401

man would have to live by if he were to be a mature person. But again, I would think that
these principles would always be subject to some sort of scrutiny and could possibly be
changing even through . . .
LS: We come to that, surely. This is what is in Dewey’s mind. But it is connected also
with this growth business. When Aristotle speaks of growth, to the extent to which he
does at all in the Ethics, he thinks of course always of a process leading to a term of the
growth: the child, the grown-up human being; the acorn, the oak tree; the egg, the hen;
and so on, whereas Dewey likes to speak of growth without thinking in any way of any
possible term of the growth: indefinite growth. And secondly, here there are human
beings, each growing: everyone grows, and ever more, and no one takes away the sun
from anybody else. In other words, no conflict; the conflicts are accidental. In a good
society, everyone would grow and grow and grow, and there would never be any conflict.
This is the absolutely utopian ingredient, I think, of Dewey’s thought.iv This is—
Same Student: I don’t think it was that indefinite in my reading of Dewey, but there
were limitations within which any person could live. In other words, if one were to seek
to grow to the extent that it hurts his brother or does something that society does not
approve of, then they’d definitely place a restriction upon that growth.
LS: Yes, no doubt. I mean, that would be the minimum condition. But even that would
not be quite sufficient, because other forms of hurting which can never be reached by law
and which are a consequence of this indeterminate growth would nevertheless happen
and have to be provided for. But because we don’t have indefinite time, the key point,
difference between Dewey and Aristotle seems to be this: that Dewey thinks in terms—
both are concerned with virtuous activity, there’s no question. But the analysis of
virtuous activity differ very radically, because Aristotle thinks in terms of passion and
reason; Dewey thinks in terms of habit and impulse. That is something very different.
Because passion and reason are fundamentally the same in all human beings at all times.
Fundamentally. Say, jealousy, envy, is not a new historical phenomenon which came up a
few centuries ago: men always have these emotions, and there is also therefore in
principle a way of treating them or handling them. But for Dewey, very radical changes
take place, namely, their habits change; say, the habit of Neanderthal man differs
radically from the habit of men in any later stage, or the habit of a Chinese coolie differs
radically from that of a Western merchant, and so on.
Student: What is the difference then between impulse and passion?
LS: Impulse—well, the notion that passion must be controlled is not equally present
when Dewey speaks of impulse. Dewey turns it around. He says: you must have first
habit, the cake of custom, without which no society is possible. But once you have that,
the stability, then it all depends that this cake of custom is leavened and leaves freedom
iv

John Dewey (1859–1952) argued that education had no particular goal: “growth”—intellectual,
emotional, moral—was an end in itself. See especially Democracy and Education (1916),
Experience and Education (1938).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

402

for development, for impulse. Impulse raises on the basis of habit [and] transforms it.
And the moral problem for Dewey is to strike a balance, not between reason and passion,
or between different passions, rather, but to strike a balance between impulse and habit.
And this balance will of course differ from individual to individual, from historical epoch
to historical epoch, and therefore there is very little which can be said to be universally
valid, unchangeable. Very little in Dewey, and very much in Aristotle.
Finally, one point which has something to do with the practical side of Dewey. From the
reading of Human Nature and Conduct, this writer acquired the idea that Dewey would
probably favor some form of loose democracy. Yes, loose—very loose, one could say.
Well, and I can only remind you of the big event some years ago when people found out
that Ivan learned to read better than Johnny. v You remember? That was the great reaction
to Dewey; it began at this very moment. That is implied in his concept of
democracy . . . Good. Now the other papers I will return next time, and perhaps we leave
time next time for that. All right.
Now we have discussed last time the difficulty peculiar to justice: a man may be a
transgressor without being unjust. We have the example which seemed to be favored by
everyone: the gentleman who commits adultery without being an adulterer. In a great
work of modern times, this subject has been presented in this form, namely, in Goethe’s
Faust. Faust is presented as “quote, a good man who in his dark urge [I try to translate
literally—LS]—who in his dark urge preserves his consciousness of the right way,
unquote.”vi Now what is that dark urge, and how does it show itself? Well, you know that
in the first place he seduces poor Gretchen, and secondly, he kills Gretchen’s mother.
Admittedly he gave her only a tranquilizer supplied by Mephistopheles, but that this was
fatal he didn’t know—but he could have known, given the source. [Laughter] And finally
he kills the brother who is enraged about the loss of honor of his sister. And nevertheless,
he is a good man. Irving Babbitt wrote a very tough criticism of Goethe’s notion in one of
his essays;vii I forget now in which. Aristotle, I think, did not think of a case so extreme
as that of Faust. Well, there is an example of that: that would perhaps be Alcibiades. But
he never says that Alcibiades was a model of a gentleman, or if you wish, of a gentleman
who once or twice transgressed but otherwise was perfect. [LS chuckles.] Now this is one
point.
The second related difficulty we have seen at 1135b23, and that is: someone does an
unjust act, but does not do it in an unjust manner. The specific example: a man is
prevented by kidnappers from restoring a deposit in time. Now he is of course in one
sense perfectly just; I mean, it was not his fault. Yet that it was an unjust act is shown by
the fact that he must pay the compensation due for nonpayment in time. Now these and
other difficulties are due to the peculiarities of justice. Justice is the virtue toward the
other man. And on this there is founded the difference, the possibility of a divorce of the
v

See Rudolf Flesch, Why Johnny Can’t Read—And What You Can Do About It (New York:
Harper, 1955).
vi
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust, “Prologue in Heaven,” lines 328-329.
vii
See Irving Babbitt, Rousseau and Romanticism (Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin
Company, 1919).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

403

external action on the one hand, and the intention on the other. Now we were at this point
and we had begun already, but let us read the beginning again in 1136a10 to 14.
Reader:
But it may perhaps be doubted whether our discussion of suffering and doing injustice
has been sufficiently definite; and in the first place, whether the matter really is, as
Euripides has put it in the strange lines—
‘I killed my mother—that’s the tale in brief!’
‘Were you both willing, or unwilling both?’
LS: Let us stop here. Now this is a new difficulty. Does not doing injustice or suffering
injustice depend on the unwillingness of the individual suffering injustice, so much so
that matricide would cease to be a crime if the mother begs her son to kill her? Now if
this were unqualifiedly so, the objectivity of justice would completely collapse, because
any crime committed at the request of someone who suffers from it would cease to be a
crime. Now how does he go on?
Reader:
Is it really possible to suffer injustice voluntarily, or on the contrary is suffering injustice
always involuntary, just as acting unjustly is always voluntary? And again, is suffering
injustice always voluntary, or always involuntary, or sometimes one and sometimes the
other? And similarly with being treated justly (acting justly being always voluntary).
Thus it would be reasonable to suppose that both being treated unjustly and being treated
justly are similarly opposed to acting unjustly and acting justly respectively: that either
both are voluntary or both involuntary. But it would be paradoxical to assert that even
being treated justly is always voluntary—
LS: Yes, but the case of which he thinks here is that of punishment. This question is
discussed at length in Plato’s Gorgias.viii Now if you undergo punishment, then you
suffer justice. Justice is done to you. But this does not necessarily mean that you like it; it
does not necessarily mean that you undergo it voluntarily. So you are acted upon justly
without in any way on your part being a voluntary participant in the action. So the
question which Aristotle raises here altogether is: is all suffering injustice involuntary? Is
all acting, doing injustice, voluntary? This is the question. Yes? Let’s go on.
Reader:
for people are sometimes treated justly against their will. The fact is that the further
question might be raised, must a man who has had an unjust thing done to him always be
said to have been treated unjustly, or does the same thing hold good of suffering as of
doing something unjust? One may be a party to a just act, whether as its agent or its
object, incidentally. And the same clearly is true of an unjust act: doing what is unjust is
not identical with acting unjustly, nor yet is suffering what is unjust identical with being
treated unjustly, and the same is true of acting and being treated justly; for it is
viii

See Plato, Gorgias 476a-481a.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

404

impossible to be treated unjustly unless the other acts unjustly, or to be treated justly
unless he acts justly. (1136a10-31)
LS: So in other words, this is the solution of this difficulty: you undergo punishment
justly. And you are entirely an involuntary partner in this just transaction, but Aristotle
says this is accidental, because the main point is of course whether the punishment
inflicted upon you is just. Then the punisher acts justly, and it is irrelevant for the
punishment whether you undergo it voluntarily or only under coercion. Yes?
Reader:
But if to act unjustly is simply to do harm to someone voluntarily, and voluntarily means
knowing the person affected, the instrument, and the manner of injury, it will follow both
that the man of defective self-restraint, inasmuch as he voluntarily harms himself,
voluntarily suffers injustice, and also that it is possible for a man to act unjustly towards
himself—
LS: Now Aristotle tries to clarify the matter starting from a different angle: what is doing
injustice? Answer: if it means harming somebody else voluntarily, then one may do
injustice to one’s self, for one may harm oneself voluntarily. Think of someone taking
poison, some form of poison, or a drug or whatever. And is this possible? Go on.
Reader:
(for the possibility of this is also a debated question). Moreover, lack of self-restraint may
make a person voluntarily submit to being harmed by another; which again would prove
that it is possible to suffer injustice voluntarily. But perhaps this definition of acting
unjustly is incorrect, and we should add to the words ‘to do harm knowing the person
affected, the instrument and the manner’ the further qualification ‘against that person’s
wish.’
LS: So now this is then the quasi-final definition: to do injustice to a man means to harm
him voluntarily against the will of the man harmed. And then the conclusion which
Aristotle draws is: one cannot do injustice to oneself. If one harms oneself voluntarily,
then one is not forced; it is not imposed upon you against your will. Therefore it is not
strictly speaking [that] injustice is done to you. Yes?
Reader:
If so, though a man can be harmed and can have an unjust thing done to him voluntarily,
no one can suffer injustice voluntarily— (1136a31-b6)
LS: Now let us look back at the case of the matricide. The mother voluntarily suffers
unjust things, namely, that the son murders the mother. But she is not voluntarily
wronged: she has no reason to complain. But, say, the public prosecutor, or anybody else
taking the case of the law as law: he justly accuses her. She is as guilty—assuming that
she is not killed in the process, then she is as guilty of the attempted murder as her son
would be, because she is at least an accessory before the fact. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

405

Reader:
because no one can wish to be harmed: even the unrestrained man does not, but acts
contrary to his wish, since no one wishes for a thing that he does not think to be good,
and the unrestrained man does what he thinks he ought not to do. One who gives away
what is his own—as Homer says that Glaucus gave to Diomede
golden arms for bronze,
An hundred beeves’ worth for the worth of nine—
cannot be said to suffer injustice; for giving rests with oneself, suffering injustice does
not—there has to be another person who acts unjustly. (1136b6-13)
LS: Yes. So that is the end of this chapter. Now here he takes up again the case of the
man lacking self-control who harms himself. But does he wrong himself? Answer: no,
because he does not do the harmful thing in order to harm himself, but because of the
supposed good. If he takes the poison, he does not do it in order to harm himself but
perhaps in order to kill himself, which in the circumstances he regards as a good. So it
remains then, the principle volenti non fit injuria: to him who wills, no injustice is done.
The case of Glaucus and Diomedes offers no difficulty, since no fraud whatever was
involved. I mean, if someone is satisfied with an exchange of goods, where the goods on
the one side have a thousandfold value of the goods on the other side, no one can
complain. So the objective damage is not important; the important point is the intention
on both sides. Yes?
Student: So this is different from the case of the matricide, if the mother wills death and
she is as unjust in the objective sense as the son who kills her . . .
LS: The action could nevertheless be unjust, and she has no reason to complain. The
injustice is not done to her [but] there could be injustice done to the whole polis. Think of
the simple case, which is much clearer, of course, that if some harm is done to a minor
with the consent of the minor; and yet this is not recognized by the law because the law
takes the position that the minor is unable to judge. And now in the case of grown-up
people, people supposed to be able to judge, there may still be a public interest involved
of which the state or the polis takes care but which excludes every right of the participant
to complain. The mother cannot complain, but the polis can, and maybe must, complain.
Is that not intelligible?
Same Student: Yes, it is. In the case of the incontinent, the polis would seem to have an
equal grounds for complaining.
LS: Under certain conditions, yes. Sure. For example, if by his incontinent actions, he2
[makes himself unable] to do his military service, that would be a case, sure. But
nevertheless, no harm is done to him; he does harm to the polis and is punished for
that . . . Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

406

Another Student: If Aristotle says that all people will what they think is good for them,
and no one wishes what they think is harmful, isn’t it a very short step to say that virtue
and justice is knowledge? If people just know what is good for them, they will do it, and
if they don’t do what is good for them, then they just don’t know it. And so—
LS: Aristotle is indeed very close to Plato, or to Socrates, in this point in particular. We
won’t be able to read this year the discussion in book 7 about incontinence, where he
takes that up in detail. But Aristotle shares one principle with Socrates: knowledge is
something unbelievably strong. And that a man with his eyes open should do the wrong
thing is as great a riddle for Aristotle as it is for Socrates, only his solution is not quite as
paradoxical. We understand immediately the situation as described in a famous verse of
Seneca’s Medea: “I see the better things, and I approve of them, and yet I follow the
worse courses.”ix Daily examples from our own or other people’s lives abound. And yet
this was for Socrates and Plato and Aristotle the greatest riddle. And why? Because they
saw the immense power of knowledge. Knowledge cannot be overrun in this way. There
must be an obfuscation of knowledge in the first place before this can take place. So if
someone sees very clearly that he should not do this, he sees it only up to a certain point,
namely, in general. But regarding his special case now, there is obfuscation. Well, it may
take on the form of sophistry, and [he might] simply say, well, once is—how do you say
it? A German proverb, the expression “einmal ist keinmal,” one time is no time, or some
other form of this kind. But at any rate, an obfuscation takes place. That is Aristotle’s
point too.
Same Student: Isn’t this a powerful argument then against the independence of the
sphere of action, because if you can say “einmal ist keinmal,” you can justify anything,
you can justify any action.
LS: Yes, sure. Well, I mean, the sophistry of human passion is practically ineradicable,
there is no doubt. But what has this to do with our question? That would happen in either
case. On the non-Socratic as well as the Socratic basis there would always be this
undeniable fact that—
Same Student: Still, still you would have a stronger argument for the sophistic if you
said that, “Well, after all the sphere of action is independent, we don’t have to look at the
highest principles all the time and try to relate them,” then you could say not perhaps
“einmal” but “dreimal.”x
LS: Well, we don’t have to look at the high principles. There is a simple example.
Someone is supposed not to drink whisky. And I’m sorry that I bring again an example
from German literature, but it so happens that I have read it in my youth more frequently
than English literature. A woman is in the unfortunate condition that she is given to the
drinking of whisky, let us say, and she is opposed to that, and she prays. She prays that
God gives her the power not to drink whisky, but while praying on her knees she is
ix
x

The remark comes from Ovid’s Medea. See Metamorphoses, book 7, lines 20-21.
Three times.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

407

moving towards the whisky.xi [LS chuckles; laughter.] I mean, every moral doctrine has
to admit that these things exist; the question is only how to interpret them. And one
interpretation is that people do this with their eyes open, fully open. And here it is
perfectly clear that she shouldn’t drink that, and then passion coming from below crushes
knowledge. And on the alternative view, the Socratic–Aristotelian view, no, the
knowledge is already obfuscated when this takes place. As I say, we would have to study
the section on incontinence in order to get the full benefit of Aristotle. To us modern
people this is a very strange doctrine.
Same Student: But then perhaps the radical cutting off of the sphere of practical action
from the sphere of ultimate truth—
LS: That has nothing to do with that, because one could say in a way that Aristotle does
that, in a way. But one could surely not say this of Socrates and Plato, that the key point
is the power of knowledge. The power of knowledge is—
Same Student: In a sense, knowledge is the connection between the two.
LS: Yes, the power of knowledge is so that it cannot be overcome by anything else in
man.
Student: Well, can we say that in modern psychiatry . . . insight is reflected in the
doctrine of rationalization as being the dominating form of self-justification, no matter
what I do? This man drinks too much. I drink, but I don’t drink as much, or I drink for
different reasons, and therefore my case is not the same. In other words, the same kind
[of] an obscuring of knowledge takes place.
LS: Yes, well, but the very term “rationalization” means that this is something which
comes afterward, you know. And the true motivations are purely passionate or emotional,
and the reason is a kind of servant of the passions. I think the doctrine behind it is
radically different. Mr. Shulsky?
Mr. Shulsky: Yes, well, it does in a way point to the fact that somehow one simply can’t
act against reason, one has to—in a way, rationalization is . . .
LS: This is I believe what Miss Schroeder meant. That is true. But this is not what the
men speaking of rationalization ordinarily mean by that, by their doctrines. That this is a
kind of indirect proof of the fact that man is a rational animal, that they do not mean.
Mr. Shulsky: They don’t mean it. . . .
LS: Yes.
Student: . . .
xi

Wilhelm Busch, Die fromme Helene (Heidelberg: Basserman, 1872).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

408

LS: Yes, sure.
Same Student: Isn’t there some danger that this idea . . . totalitarian regimes indefensible
claims for knowledge . . . Do you see what I’m getting at?
LS: Well, when we speak of knowledge, we mean knowledge of the truth. A pretended
knowledge is not knowledge.
Same Student: What I’m getting at is this—and I’m not necessarily agreeing with . . . by
some writers that Aristotle and Plato especially . . . responsible, well, not directly, for
many totalitarian . . . that have taken place because of the particular doctrine of
knowledge . . . truth.
LS: Yes, but give a single example of such a responsibility.
Same Student: I was thinking of Karl Popper’s book.xii Have you read it?
LS: No, I have only heard about it. But it is notorious. From what I have heard from
competent people, that a man who talks all the time about science doesn’t have the
slightest notion of the scientific or scholarly procedure in speaking about things like
Plato, or Hegel, or other subjects. We know a bit about the genesis of the so-called
totalitarian regimes in the twentieth century, but there is nowhere an influence of Plato
and Aristotle. Perhaps some professors as an afterthought referred to Plato and Aristotle,
but . . . For Plato and Aristotle, the mere fact that these were demagogues (shouting,
vulgar demagogues) at the head of masses of men was a perfectly sufficient reason for
having nothing but contempt for this. No, no link. No link. The only excuse which people
like Popper could have is this: that Plato, if he wrote the Seventh Letter, which I believe,
says3 that when he was about twenty, some of his friends at that time made the
revolution, let us say, of the Thirty Tyrants, you know, to restore virtue and justice in
Athens, and then they behaved in an absolutely bestial manner, so much so that in
retrospect the old despised democracy appeared to be the Golden Age. Now all right, so
then Plato was tempted for a moment when he was twenty. But he had sixty long years to
repent that, and how unfair to hold him responsible for that velleity of a moment in the
life of a young boy. No, that is nothing; not to be taken seriously. Yes?
Student: Plato had students since he was twenty years old . . . he was a teacher of tyrants,
and you could say the same thing about—
LS: Of whom?
Same Student: Dionysius.
LS: Well, he wanted to help the Syracusans, and in order to do that he tried to civilize
Dionysius of Syracuse. He was after all a friend of Dion, the man who was the enemy of
xii

Karl Popper, The Open Society and Its Enemies, Volume 1: The Spell of Plato (London: G.
Routledge & Sons, 1945).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

409

Dionysius,xiii to say nothing of the fact that a tyrant, a word which covers a great variety
of phenomena, is not the same as a Führer.
Same Student: Oh, no, but I’m just, for instance, Alexander was counted as . . .
LS: He was a legitimate king, after all. But you know what Aristotle thought about it:
Aristotle was prepared to instruct him, to educate him, but he disapproved of his policy.
And Aristotle is blamed by people like Popper because he did not approve of Alexander’s
integrationist policy, you know, of Greek and Persians. So in other words, where shall we
begin and end once we begin with this kind of argument? Yes?
Student: You said that . . . knowledge cannot be wiped out . . . self-indulgence . . . light
of reason . . .
LS: Yes, as long as the knowledge is there. As long as the knowledge is there, [but] the
knowledge cannot be wiped out. The knowledge can give way; for example, a man may
die, [and] then his knowledge disappears.
Student: . . . one becomes so self-indulgent, so unjust that he no longer has the
knowledge—
LS: Ya, sure. Sure, a man can go and corrupt himself so that even the very recollection of
what he once knew will vanish; this is clear. But the point is that once he is no longer
compos mentis, then you cannot possibly say his mind was overcome by passion, because
there was no longer a mind to overcome. The problem or phenomenon to be explained or
to be clarified is precisely: can the mind in its actuality be overcome?
Student: Would you see any relationship between this and say the Apostle Paul’s
argument in Romans, chapter 1 about in the beginning men had the knowledge of God,
but—
LS: Yes, sure, there is a connection: a diametrically opposite view. [Laughter] Sure. I
didn’t say say it in order to make it up, but obviously there is a diametrically opposite
view. And the fact that we are all brought up in the biblical tradition makes it particularly
difficult for us to understand the Socratic–Platonic–Aristotelian view. One can also say
that in a way the Pauline view, although [it consists of] very strong statements, is closer
to what we commonsensically feel not only today but to what men commonsensically
thought at all times rather than the other view. Now where are we now? b15, yes.
Reader:
There still remainxiv two of the questions that we proposed to discuss: (1) Is it ever he
who gives the unduly large share, or is it always he who receives it, that is guilty of the
injustice? and (2) Can one act unjustly towards oneself?
xiii

See Plutarch, Lives, “Dion.”
The tape was changed at this point. The omitted portion of the passage has been supplied from
the text.
xiv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

410

If the former alternative is possible, that is, if it may be the giver and not the receiver of
too large a share who acts unjustly, then when a man knowingly and voluntarily assigns a
larger share to another than to himself—as modest people are thought to do, for an
equitable man is apt to take less than his due—this is a case of acting unjustly towards
oneself. But perhaps this also requires qualification. For the man who gave himself the
smaller share may possibly have got a larger share of some other good thing, for instance
glory, or intrinsic moral nobility.
LS: So is it a case of injuring oneself, of wronging oneself, if one gives the other man
more than to oneself? But Aristotle says this is precisely the case of the gentleman. He
does this all the time, and he of course does not do injustice to himself. He gets
something much better than money, namely, praise or the noble itself. That is what he
says here. Yes?
Reader:
Also the inference may be refuted by referring to our definition of acting unjustly: in the
case supposed, the distributor has nothing done to him against his wish; therefore he does
not suffer injustice merely because he gets the smaller share: at most he only suffers
damage.
LS: So he who gives more than he owes at worst suffers harm, loss of property or
whatever, but no injury. He has not been wronged. Yes?
Reader:
And it is clear that the giver as well as the receiver of an undue share may be acting
unjustly, and that the receiver is not doing so in all cases. For the charge of injustice
attaches, not to a man of whom it can be said that he does what is unjust, but to one of
whom it can be said that he does this voluntarily, that is to say one from whom the action
originates; and the origin of the act in this case lies in the giver and not in the receiver of
the share.
LS: Ya. The unjust distributor, or perhaps judge, does not make the receiver’s receiving
an unjust act, at least not necessarily. That’s obvious. Or is there any difficulty? If you, as
a bona fide party to a lawsuit, get more than you deserve by an unjust decision of the
judge of which injustice you are unaware, then you do not act unjustly. Yes?
Reader:
Again, ‘to do a thing’ has more than one meaning. In a certain sense a murder is done by
the inanimate instrument, or by the murderer’s hand, or by a slave acting under orders.
But though these do what is unjust, they cannot be said to act unjustly. (1136b15-31)
LS: This is again this distinction which does not come out so well in the English
translation. Say, the hand or the knife doesn’t commit an unjust act, and yet it does an
unjust thing: the unjust thing, say, being murder. But it doesn’t act unjustly, of course:
being inanimate, it cannot act unjustly. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

411

Reader:
Again, although if a judge has given an unfair judgement in ignorance, he is not guilty of
injustice, nor is the judgement unjust, in the legal sense of justice (though the judgement
is unjust in one sense, for legal justice is different from the first justice)xv—
LS: Let us stop here one moment. The first justice: this is the same [as] what he called
formerly to physikon dikaion, the natural right, and the only other reference to the natural
right which occurs here, although interestingly enough not under the name. Now the
natural right, or rather the right in the primary and first sense, means here “the simply or
unqualifiedly just.” If we have an unjust decision without subjective injustice, then justice
in the ordinary sense would in no way be affected, but justice in the highest sense [would
be]. Yes. I mean, if the judge hands down [an] unjust decision but not guiltily, then in one
sense he is perfectly just. And yet in a more important sense, not he but his action, his
verdict, is unjust, and that is perhaps the most important consideration. Yes?
Reader:
yet if he knowingly gives an unjust judgement, he is himself taking more than his share,
either of favour or of vengeance. Hence a judge who gives an unjust judgement for these
motives takes more than his due just as much as if he shares the proceeds of the injustice;
for even a judge who assigns a piece of land on that condition does not receive land but
money.)
LS: Now this is a relatively simple case of the corrupt judge and his unjust gain. And
Aristotle uses here very laconic language, meaning by this example of land and money
(he means enlarging that): it doesn’t make any difference whether he gets any material
advantage from a corrupt judgment. It is perfectly sufficient if he exercises revenge on
the man whom he condemns, and so on and so on. This is no difficulty. Yes. Now let us
read as much as we can of the next chapter.
Reader:
Men think that it is in their power to act unjustly, and therefore that it is easy to be just.
But really this is not so. It is easy to lie with one’s neighbour’s wife or strike a bystander
or slip some money into a man’s hand, and it is in one’s power to do these things or not;
but to do them as a result of a certain disposition of mind is not easy, and is not in one’s
power. Similarly men suppose it requires no special wisdom to know what is just and
what is unjust, because it is not difficult to understand the things about which the law
pronounces. But the actions prescribed by law are only accidentally just actions.
(1136b32-1137a12)
LS: Yes. Now let us return here to 1129b12, a passage which we have discussed before,
where he says: “All the legal acts, or the legal things, are in a manner just.” You
remember? That he said at the beginning. Now he uses a much more restrained statement:
the legal things, the things established by the laws, are not the just things, except
accidentally, meaning they mean to be, they are meant to be just, but whether they are in
xv

In Rackham’s translation: “from justice in the primary sense.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

412

fact is a long question. The purpose of this particular chapter is very difficult to see. I for
one do not see it.
Reader:
How an action must be performed, how a distribution must be made to be a just action or
a just distribution—to know this is a harder task than to know what medical treatment
will produce health. Even in medicine, though it is easy to know what honey, wine and
hellebore, cautery and surgery are, to know how and to whom and when to apply them so
as to effect a cure is no less an undertaking than to be a physician. And for this very
reason men think that the just man may act unjustly no less than justly, because the just
man is not less but rather more able than another to do any particular unjust thing: for
example, he is able to lie with a woman, or strike a blow, and a brave man is able to
throw away his shield and able to wheel to the right or left and run away. xvi But to be a
coward and to be guilty of injustice consists not in doing these things (except
accidentally), but in doing them from a certain disposition of mind; just as to be a
physician and cure one’s patients is not a matter of employing or not employing surgery
or drugs, but of doing so in a certain manner.
LS: So it is at least as difficult to know the just things as to know the healthy things. I
mean, in an external and superficial way, to know them is easy, but to know them
properly, technically, adequately, that is very difficult in most cases. So there is here an
analogy between the just man and the physician, an analogy with which you are familiar
from Plato’s Republic;xvii and yet the Republic precisely makes clear, and Aristotle too in
other places, the great difference between the physician or the technical man in general
and the morally good man. And that would lead us now too far. Let us now complete this
chapter.
Reader:
Claims of justice exist between persons who share in things generally speaking good, and
who can have too large a share or too small a share of them. There are persons who
cannot have too large a share of these goods: such as probablyxviii the gods. And there are
those who can derive no benefit from any share of them: namely, the incurably vicious; to
them all the things generally good are harmful. But for others they are beneficial within
limits; and this is the case with human beings. xix (1137a12-30)
LS: Yes. Well, this is a kind of concluding remark to this effect: that the just things are
located between two extremes, which are where we can no longer find them, between
simple extremes. The gods, “in a way”—the word which he translates here “probably” is
“perhaps”—the gods on the one hand, and men for whom nothing good can be good
because of their complete corruption. The sphere in which the just things reside, are at

xvi

In Rackham’s translation: “he can lie with a woman, or strike a blow, and a brave man can
through away his shield, and can wheel to the right.”
xvii
This analogy is developed throughout book 1 of the Republic and is introduced in 332c.
xviii
In Rackham’s translation: “doubtless, for example.”
xix
In Rackham’s translation: “with ordinary mortals.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 22

413

home, is not simple as these two extremes limiting the sphere of the just things are
simple.
Now in the sequel he then turns to the question of equity, and we will take this up next
time. And I hope to be able to return the papers next time. Thank you.
1

Deleted “to.”
Deleted “disables himself.”
3
Deleted “there.”
2

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

414

Session 23: May 22, 1968
Leo Strauss: I would like to conclude today our joint reading of the fifth book of the
Ethics. This last section of the Ethics, which we began reading already last time, is
difficult, not so much on account of the subject matter and what Aristotle says about it as
because one doesn’t know why Aristotle does speak of this particular subject here. The
plan seems to be confused or disorderly, and it is very hard to believe that Aristotle ever
wrote something confusedly. But of course it might not have been Aristotle but the fate of
books after a man’s death, and for this no human being can be held responsible.
Now we come to the section dealing with equity. Let us consider first how this is
prepared, what the context is. Aristotle has said repeatedly that to be unjust and to be a
transgressor, i.e., to commit an unjust action, are two different things. Now in making this
distinction, it is very important whether the action is voluntary or not. Take the case of
the man who does not return a deposit in time, yet it’s because he is prevented by
kidnappers from doing so. So in one sense he doesn’t keep his part of the contract: he
commits an unjust act; and yet he cannot strictly be held to have committed an unjust act,
and this leads to a distinction between strict law and equitable law, the Romans’
distinction. The Greeks have a similar distinction: the Greek word is epieikeia, of which
Aristotle will speak right at the beginning of the chapter.
But let us first have another look at the Rhetoric, and the simplest thing would be if Mr.
Pangle would read just a few paragraphs, from 11 to 14, book 1, chapter 13, sections 11
to 14 of the Rhetoric.
Reader:
We have said that there are two kinds of just and unjust actions (for some are written, but
others are unwritten), and have spoken of those concerning which the laws are explicit; of
those that are unwritten there are two kinds. One kind arises from an excess of virtue or
vice, which is followed by praise or blame, honour or dishonour, and rewards; for
instance, to be grateful to a benefactor, to render good for good, to help one’s friends, and
the like; the other kind contains what is omitted in the special written law. For that which
is equitable seems to be just, and equity is justice that goes beyond the written law. These
omissions are sometimes involuntary, sometimes voluntary, on the part of the legislators;
involuntary when it may have escaped their notice, voluntary when, being unable to
define for all cases, they are obliged to make a universal statement, which is not
applicable to all, but only to most, cases; and whenever it is difficult to give a definition
owing to the infinite number of cases, as, for instance, the size and kind of an iron
instrument used in wounding; for life would not be long enough to reckon all the
possibilities. If then no exact definition is possible, but legislation is necessary, one must
have recourse to general terms; so that, if a man wearing a ring lifts up his hand to strike
or actually strikes, according to the written law he is guilty of wrongdoing, but in reality
he is not; and this is a case for equity.i (1374a18-b1)
i

Aristotle, The “Art” of Rhetoric (London: William Heinemann; New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1926), 145-47.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

415

LS: Thank you. So there are two kinds of just things that are unwritten; Aristotle does not
speak here of “natural” but of “unwritten.” The first are the things which are beyond,
higher than, the law. Yes?
Student: Something that came up here in that passage of the Rhetoric that’s also related
to book 5 of the Ethics . . . confusing. He says that men commit acts for which they are
either praised or blamed or rewarded, but he doesn’t give any . . . for being rewarded.
LS: For example, if someone is grateful to his benefactors, he is rewarded, praised with
respect, and so on.
Student: Yes, but I should think if he’s offering reward as a possibility, he should also be
offering punishment.
LS: No, that is the point. This doesn’t work. We come to that; I will explain it. First are
the things which are above the law, higher than the law. Take the first example, that of
gratitude. If gratitude, reciprocation for kind actions, were made a law, there could no
longer be any gratitude. The obliged man could sue for proper behavior on the part of the
man who may be nice. Gratitude is voluntary, or it is nothing, and therefore, by its very
nature, it cannot be legislated. And the same applies to the other thing, helping friends.
This is also extremely hard to define, because friends—having friends means of course
also taking the side against the enemies (not here the public enemies, but the private
enemies), and this is not the business of the judge or of the legislator to take sides in these
kinds of troubles.
Now the second kind, which is more important, the second kind of unwritten just things,
is what is omitted in the particular law, i.e., in the law of this particular city which is as
such the written law. And this is done fundamentally because of the defect of every
legislation. Aristotle will speak about this in greater detail and [with] greater clarity in the
coming chapter of the Ethics, to which we may turn now. But the latter, to repeat, is the
only thing which he calls equitable. Yes?
Reader:
We have next to speak of Equity and the equitable, and of their relation to Justice and to
what is just respectively. For upon examination it appears that Justice and Equity are
neither absolutely identical nor generically different. Sometimes, it is true, we praise
equity and the equitable man, so much so that we even apply the word ‘equitable’ as a
term of approval to other things besides what is just, and use it as the equivalent of
‘good,’ denoting by ‘more equitable’ merely that a thing is better. Yet at other times,
when we think the matter out, it seems strange that the equitable should be praiseworthy
if it is something different fromii the just. If they are different, either the just or the
equitable is not good; if both are good, they are the same thing.

ii

In Rackham’s translation: “other than.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

416

These then are the considerations, more or less, from which the difficulty as to the
equitable arises. (1137a31-b6)
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. Now what is this difficulty? Aristotle refers here to
Greek usage [of] the word which we translate by “equitable,” epieikes or epieikeia. This
is also used in the sense of “nice,” as in a nice or gentle man. You know, one of the many
words the Greeks had for a gentleman was ho epieikēs, where it did not have the narrow
meaning of the equitable man, but it included it: it is a part of man’s virtue to be equitable
and not merely just. But this precisely raises the difficulty. We regard what is more
equitable as better than what is merely just. Hence, is then the just not good, not serious?
Or is the equitable not just? The alternative would be that both are identical, the just and
the equitable, but this would make [for] unintelligible usage, where one distinguishes
between justice and the equitable.
Now I will read to you a passage from Plato’s Laws, which might be of some help for the
understanding of this passage, and that is 757d to e. That is a passage of crucial
importance for the Laws as a whole; I believe I have referred to it before, but I will now
take out one passage.
“Whoever founds the city at any time must make this same object the aim of his
legislation, not the advantage of a few tyrants, or of one, or of some form of democracy,
but justice always. And this consists in what we have just stated, namely, the natural
equality given on each occasion to things unequal. [Natural equality means of course here
in fact inequality, because if you treat by nature unequal things according to their nature,
they will get unequal shares.—LS] Nonetheless, it is necessary for every city at times to
employ even this equality in a modified equality, if it is to avoid involving itself in
intestine discord in one section or another. For the equitable and considerate, wherever
employed, is an infringement of the perfect and exact, as being contrary to strict
justice.”iii
And concretely, that means in the context [that] one must also introduce arithmetical
equality in the form of election by lot. That is the context. But this is quite remarkable.
The equitable is an infringement of the perfectly and exactly just. In other words, the
equitable, we would be simply compelled to say, is an infringement of what is by nature
just, because he had spoken before of this natural equality, i.e., natural inequality. You
may remember the passage here; we can have a look at it in 1136b32 to 34. “When he
judged unknowingly.”
iii

Strauss reads a modified translation of Plato, Laws, trans. R. G. Bury (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, 1961), vol. 1, 415. In Bury’s translation:
“And whoever founds a State elsewhere at any time must make this same object the aim of his
legislation,—not the advantage of a few tyrants, or of one, or of some form of democracy, but
justice always; and this consists in what we have just stated, namely, the natural equality given on
each occasion to things unequal. None the less, it is necessary for every State at times to employ
even this equality in a modified degree, if it is to avoid involving itself in intestine discord, in one
section or another,—for the reasonable and considerate, wherever employed, is an infringement
of the perfect and exact, as being contrary to strict justice.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

417

Reader:
Again, although if a judge has given an unfair judgement in ignorance, he is not guilty of
injustice, nor is the judgement unjust, in the legal sense of justice—
LS: According to what is legally just. Yes?
Reader:
(though the judgement is unjust in one sense, for legal justice is different from the first
justice)iv— (1136b32-34)
LS: Yes. Here we have the same case again. The legal justice (the first justice is again,
just as in the passage of Plato): the perfect and exact justice, what is by nature just. And
equity, the equitable, is an infringement of that, an adaptation to what the human situation
requires, and a deflection from justice pure and simple. So this would lead us to say that
the equitable is different from what is by nature right according to both Plato and
Aristotle. Is this clear? That is of some importance. Now let us see the solution which
Aristotle suggests. 1137b7. You can read the whole sentence.
Reader:
Yet they are all in a manner correct, and not really inconsistent. For equity, while
superior to one sort of justice, is itself just: it is not superior to justice as being generically
different from it. Justice and equity are therefore the same thing, and both are good,
though equity is the better.
LS: Ya. Now according to Thomas Aquinas’s explanation of this statement, which in
itself sounds very clear, that which is equitable (he uses the Greek word in Latin
transcription, epiiches)1 is better than legal justice but is contained under natural right. v
That is I think just the opposite of what Plato and Aristotle say about that. But it is not so
simple, as we will see from the sequel. Yes?
Reader:
The source of the difficulty is that equity, though just, is not legal justice, but a
rectification of legal justice. The reason for this is— (1137b7-13)
LS: And the rectification one could of course say requires a standard, and where would
we find that standard except in natural right?
Reader:
The reason for this is that law is always a general statement, yet there are cases which it
is not possible to cover in a general statement. In matters therefore where, while it is
necessary to speak in general terms, it is not possible to do so correctly, the law takes into
consideration the majority of cases, although it is not unaware of the error this involves.
iv
v

In Rackham’s translation: “justice in the primary sense.”
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §1081.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

418

And this does not make it a wrong law; for the error is not in the law nor in the lawgiver,
but in the nature of the case: the mattervi of conduct is essentially irregular.
LS: Yes, let us [stop] here. So in other words, law is essentially defective because of its
universality, which cannot be maintained in practice; and yet it must be asserted in
universal terms. Law, one can say, asserts a unity comprising all cases of a certain kind,
which unity proves on inspection to be a spurious unity. So it ([a nomos]) is just the
opposite of an idea in the Platonic sense,2 to an idea which does not have this spurious
character. But the question arises here, which we have stated before: what is the standard
for correcting the legislator’s necessarily defective law?
Reader:
When therefore the law lays down a general rule, and thereafter a case arises which is an
exception to the rule, it is then right, where the lawgiver’s pronouncement because of its
absoluteness is defective and erroneous, to rectify the defect by deciding as the lawgiver
would himself decide if he were present on the occasion, and would have enacted if he
had been cognizant of the case in question. Hence, while the equitable is just, and is
superior to one sort of justice, it is not superior to justice simply, vii but only to the error
due to its absolute statement. This is the essential nature of the equitable: it is a
rectification of law where law is defective because of its generality. (1137b13-27)
LS: So how then does Aristotle avoid the necessity of having recourse to natural right or
natural law for correcting the lawgiver’s imperfect law? Yes?
Student: By trying to decide as the lawgiver would.
LS: I beg your pardon?
Same Student: By trying to decide as he supposes the lawgiver would.
LS: Yes, well, what would—how could this be done in the simplest case, to make quite
clear that no necessary recourse to natural law is involved?
Same Student: . . . to understand the principles of the law.
LS: In other words, if the legislator has stated the ratio legis, the ground why he has
given the law. And then this ratio legis acts as a standard for judging of the wisdom of
applying the law in this particular circumstance. Now there may not be an explicit ratio
legis, but then the mind of the jurist, of a trained jurist, can supply this reason and act
accordingly. Yes?
Reader:
In fact this is the reason why things are not all determined by law: it is because there are
some cases for which it is impossible to lay down a law, so that a special ordinance
vi
vii

In Rackham’s translation: “material.”
In Rackham’s translation: “absolute justice.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

419

becomes necessary. For what is itself indefinite can only be measured by an indefinite
standard, like the leaden rule used by Lesbian builders; just as that rule is not rigid but
can be bent to the shape of the stone, so a special ordinance is made to fit the
circumstances of the case.
LS: Well, a case would be, for example, an ostracism. There is no universal law there,
that people who are suspect or disturb the democracy because of their outstanding virtue
should be ostracized. But this will be done in the circumstances not on the basis of a
general law but of a decree where people will make clear that this man is a nuisance
because of his superior virtue and therefore should be exiled. Yes?
Reader:
It is now clearviii what the equitable is, and that it is just, and that it is superior to one sort
of justice. And from this it is clear what the equitable man is: he is one who by choice
and habit does what is equitable, and who does not stand on his rights unduly, but is
content to receive a smaller share although he has the law on his side. And the disposition
described is Equity; it is a special kind of Justice, not a different quality altogether.
LS: Yes. Yes?
Student: I’m just a little confused by . . . You spoke previously about politics or the
realm of politics being somehow the tension—or coming into existence because of a
tension between the naturally just and the naturally good. Is that correct?
LS: One can say that, yes. I remember having used such an expression.
Same student: Now you’re speaking, or at least you’re saying that Aristotle is speaking
of a standard called the naturally right.
LS: Well, that is the same translation: right or just. [It] is the same translation.
Student: I wondered whether it was not, the naturally right was in some sense . . . to
harmonize . . .
LS: No, no. One can say that the term “right,” and especially the plural, “rights,” as we
use it, was not so easy for the Greeks as it is for us, and we will come across a reason for
that very soon in the next section. So then we will go on to the next chapter.
Reader:
The foregoing discussion has indicated the answer to the question, Is it possible or not for
a man to commit injustice against himself? One class of just actions consists of those
acts, in accordance with any virtue, which are ordained by law. For instance, the law does
not sanction suicide (and what it does not expressly sanction, it forbids). (1137b271138a7)
viii

In Rackham’s translation: “plain”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

420

LS: Let us stop here one moment. Now Aristotle returns here again to the subject which
he has discussed quite extensively: whether one can do injustice to, whether one can do
wrong to oneself. Why he brings it up again is very unclear. According to Thomas’s
explanation, the reason is [that] he has to speak of the just in a very loose sense, in a
metaphorical sense, at the end of this chapter, and for this reason he brings this in. ix I
confess I’m not convinced by this explanation. Now the question is: can one wrong
oneself? There is first this reason given: one can do what the law does not command.
That is to say, for example, one can commit suicide; and in doing so, you do wrong. You
do what the law has forbidden, and you do it to yourself. This remark here about law is
very interesting and very revealing: “What the law does not command, it forbids,”
contrary to our view that what the law does not forbid, it permits. This archaic view of
law, as we can call it, implies that there is strictly speaking no permissive law. The law
either commands or forbids; it does not permit. And if you think that through, there
cannot be rights proper, because rights are of course permissions given to individuals or
groups to act in this and this way. Licet: he may act in this and this manner. Yes. Now, so
this would seem to prove that one can wrong oneself. It is not Aristotle’s own argument,
but it was obviously intelligible to him, and not altogether negligible. Yes?
Reader:
Further, when a man voluntarily (which means with knowledge of the person affected
and the instrument employed) does an injury (not in retaliation) that is against the law, he
commits injustice. But he who kills himself in a fit of passion, voluntarily does an injury
(against the right principle) which the law does not allow. Therefore the suicide commits
injustice; but against whom?
LS: Yes. Now wait here one moment. So to wrong someone is to harm him voluntarily
against the law. But he who commits suicide harms himself voluntarily against the law.
These are the two reasons which seem to show that a man can wrong himself. But
Aristotle comes now with this counterargument.
Reader:
Against the cityx rather than against himself; for he suffers voluntarily, and nobody
suffers injustice voluntarily. This is why the cityxi exacts a penalty; suicide is punished by
certain marks of dishonour, as being an offense against the city.xii (1138a7-14)
LS: So that’s clear. In other words, Aristotle retains his old view: no one can harm
himself. But of course a certain action seemingly to be one of wronging oneself is a
punishable action because it is wronging the city, as in the case of suicide. Yes?
Reader:
Moreover, it is not possible to act unjustly toward oneself in the sense in which a man is
unjust who is a doer of injustice only and not universally wicked. (This case is distinct
ix

See Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §1091.
In Rackham’s translation: “It seems to be against the state.”
xi
In Rackham’s translation: “city.”
xii
In Rackham’s translation: “city.”
x

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

421

from the former, because Injustice in one sense is a special form of wickedness, like
Cowardice, and does not imply universal wickedness; hence it is necessary further to
show that a man cannot commit injustice against himself in this sense either.) For if it
were, it would be possible for the same thing to have been taken away from and added to
the same thing at the same time. But this is impossible: justice and injustice always
necessarily imply more than one person.
LS: So now he takes justice in the narrower sense, in the particular sense where it is
distinguished from the other virtues. And if we use justice in the particular sense, we say
that a transgressor, a man committing an unjust act, is not necessarily an unjust man; and
then from this it follows that one cannot wrong oneself. Volenti non fit injuria: for he
who wills, no injustice is done if harm is done to him. Yes?
Reader:
Again an act of injustice must be voluntary and done from choice, and also unprovoked;
we do not think that a man acts unjustly if having suffered he retaliates, and gives what
he got. But when a man injures himself, he both does and suffers the same thing at the
same time. Again—
LS: And this also proves that it is impossible to speak of wronging oneself. Yes?
Reader:
Again if a man could act unjustly towards himself, it would be possible to suffer injustice
voluntarily. Furthermore no one is guilty of injustice without committing some particular
unjust act; but a man cannot commit adultery with his own wife, or burglary on his own
premises, or theft of his own property.
LS: These massive examples seem to show very clearly how plausible it is to say [that] a
man cannot wrong himself. If a man would burglarize his own safe, no one in his senses
would ever regard him as other but a fool [LS chuckles], and surely not as an unjust man.
Yes?
Reader:
And generally, the question, Can a man act unjustly towards himself? is solved by our
decision upon the question, Can a man suffer injustice voluntarily?
(It is further manifest that, though both to suffer and to do injustice are evils—for the
former is to have less and the latter to have more than the mean, corresponding to what is
health-giving in medicine and conducive to fitness in athletic training—nevertheless to
do injustice is the worse evil, for it is reprehensible, implying vice in the agent, and vice
utter and absolute—or nearly so, for it is true that not every wrong act voluntarily
committed implies vice—, whereas to suffer injustice does not necessarily imply vice,
viz. injustice, in the victim. (1138a14-35)
LS: Yes. So that is clear. Both suffering injustice and inflicting injustice are bad, but
doing injustice is worse. Well, many of you have read the detailed discussion of this

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

422

subject in the Gorgias, where this is a major theme and on which Aristotle’s argument is
largely based. Now, but let us first go on.
Reader:
Thus in itself to suffer injustice is the lesser evil, though accidentally it may be the
greater. With this however science is not concerned; science pronounces pleurisy a more
serious disorder than a sprain, in spite of the fact that in certain circumstances a sprain
may be accidentally worse than pleurisy, as for instance if it should happen that owing to
a sprain you fell and in consequence were taken by the enemy and killed.)
LS: Yes. This is a very strange discussion, isn’t it? I mean, justice is a rational activity.
And arts are also rational activities, therefore we can illustrate justice partly through
examples from the arts, as we know from the Platonic dialogues almost everywhere. And
now here he takes the example of medicine: in medicine a certain disease, here pleurisy,
is in itself worse than a sprain. But in a given situation pleurisy may be better than a
sprain because a sprain prevents you from running away and thus brings about your
death. It is very strange that Aristotle doesn’t give an example from the sphere of justice,
because if one takes him by his word for one moment, one would reach the conclusion
that doing injustice may under certain circumstances be preferable to suffering injustice,
which doesn’t seem to make sense. Or are there cases? Think of a man who steals money
from a Nazi office in order to escape Nazi persecution. He clearly commits an act of
theft. He does injustice, and he does it in order not to suffer injustice. I mean, this is an
imaginable case. Would3 not a certain cautious application of the example from medicine
to justice [therefore] be in order? Hard to say. Now let’s read that.
Reader:
In a metaphorical and analogical sense however there is such a thing as justice, not
towards oneself but between different parts of one’s nature; not, it is true, justice in the
full sense of the term, but such justice as subsists between master and slave, or between
the head of a household and his wife and children. For in the discourses on this question a
distinction is set up between the rational and the irrational parts of the soul; and this is
what leads some people to suppose that there is such a thing as injustice towards oneself,
because these parts of the self may be thwarted in their respective desires, so that there
may be a sort of justice between them, such as exists between ruler and subject.
So much may be said in description of Justice and of the other Moral Virtues. (1138a35b14)
LS: Yes. Well, that’s the end of the book. Now this last passage is not particularly
exciting. Strictly speaking, a man does not wrong himself when, say, he wrongs his wife,
children—especially his children and slaves 4—but in a metaphoric sense he does. So that
is a clarification which people who are very exact will be grateful for, but it doesn’t open
such interesting possibilities as the preceding and central passage in this chapter.
So now we have completed then the section on justice. It was a first reading, necessarily
superficial. I hope a few things have become clear, although there can be no doubt that

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

423

more things have remained non-clear than have become clear. Although perhaps the most
important points, the practically and politically most important points, are not too
difficult to grasp, but the refinements, the subtleties, this is a question. Mr. Zinman?
Mr. Zinman: In a certain sense it would seem that justice is the most—well, certainly
the most problematical book that we’ve read to this point.
LS: Yes.
Mr. Zinman: And if the aim of the Ethics, or the aim of the practical findings—if the
aim of the Ethics is primarily to make men good, and if there’s a necessary limitation on
making men good in the immanent nature, the nature of things, then it would seem that if
this book was truly a practical book, it would not, say, raise the difficulties that it does
raise in relation to justice very clearly, in relation to the other moral virtues less clearly,
and perhaps would even stop with the discussion of justice—or maybe some sort of
discussion of practical wisdom but certainly not on the level that it discusses it in book 6,
and then go on to the discussion of friendship in the final . . . What I’m really asking is, it
doesn’t seem—from the point of view of practical goodness it doesn’t seem that it is
necessary to illuminate the limits of the political for practical purposes. But yet Aristotle
seems to be concerned almost more with illuminating the limits of the political than with
illuminating the—
LS: The latter is an exaggeration, I believe, and you are especially under the impression
of reading the fifth book in this seminar, but otherwise you are right. But there is one
simple answer. Aristotle’s work is of course very practical, and precisely these
discussions or intimations of the limitations of the political, practical, moral, or whatever
you call it, are of immense practical importance for one simple reason. They lead to the
most important practical question, or the answer to the most important practical question:
how shall I live? Which way of life shall I choose? Which is an eminently practical
question. In other words, one can say [that] classical political philosophy both in its
Platonic and its Aristotelian form, and even in its Stoic form, culminates in the
description of the wise man or the philosopher, whatever you call him, as that human
individual who fulfills, within the limits of the possible, what the polis promises and
cannot fulfill. So it is not a merely theoretical analysis of morality, but it has a very
important practical message. And the point is, even so, that—let us assume, let us grant
that the primary addressees are the gentlemen. If they get an inkling that there is
something higher than gentlemanship as they understand it, that may have a good effect
on them. In our abominable language, a certain anti-intellectualism—which may very
well go with perfect gentlemanship in the ordinary sense of the term—is rendered
questionable in their eyes, and they begin to see that these strange fellows who sit in
corners and talk instead of going out fighting are necessary for the well-being of the
polis.
Mr. Zinman: I clearly understood that, the way in which this addresses the practical
question in the highest sense, but it would seem that it would almost have been better to
write two different books, in a sense. For example, it’s hard in a way to understand in

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

424

what way, say, the gentleman is open to philosophy and still remains a gentleman. I
mean, it’s certainly clear that someone like, say, Churchill could read the Ethics and have
a fairly good understanding of the Ethics and still remain, say, a political man.
LS: Yes, sure. He was not for one moment tempted [laughter] . . . I’m sure of that. That
is quite true. And in order to see that, one only has to read Churchill’s most theoretical
statements—as far as I know they occur in his Marlborough—and which are very
interesting and very revealing. But they are of course very inadequate from any
theoretical point of view but sufficient for practical purposes, especially for practical
purposes in the England of Churchill’s lifetime. Yes. To make proposals to Aristotle how
he should have written his book—I’m sure you’ll see that there is a certain impropriety
[LS chuckles] in that action. [Laughter] Yes?
Student: Is the equitable simply analogous to the politically just?
LS: The equitable?
Same Student: Yes.
LS: No.
Same Student: What is the relationship between the two?
LS: Equitable and the political?
Same Student: We determined that it wasn’t based on natural right and is based on
standards derived from the legislator in the Laws, and politically just somehow similarly
based, and I’m wondering what is the relationship between the equitable and the
politically just.
LS: Yes, well, if you take the passage in the Laws which I read, you could say [that] the
politically feasible is the dilution of what is by nature right by something which is not by
nature right.
Same Student: Yes, but Aristotle . . .
LS: Aristotle would not put it quite this way, but I think Plato practically puts it that way.
Now what is by nature right is an inegalitarian natural right; what is not by nature right is
treating all men as equals regardless of whether they are equals or not. In political terms,
election of officials by lot, where everyone has the same chance as everybody else to be
elected, this is a dilution of natural right in order to make possible civil society. If one
wants to speak in general terms, and sometimes I think one must, one could say that
Aristotle’s equivalent to that is rather to say that natural right is changeable; one could
even say almost infinitely changeable. In other words, such a compromise would still be
by nature right, but it would not be by nature right everywhere. This is in a very rough
way the line between Plato and Aristotle as I think one should draw it. So between the—

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

425

the equitable is of course to begin with simply one phenomenon among a number of
phenomena belonging to the political–legal sphere, and only in this Platonic passage
which we read is it given such a radical importance, central importance.
Student: In light of what you just said, would you mind saying again why this idea of
making natural right an infinite division does not . . . you said earlier I think that it is
relative, but it is not relative in the sense of the modern—
LS: Yes. Yes, surely not in the sense of present-day social science, there is no doubt
about that. And I believe the point is this: that Aristotle would be compelled to make a
distinction between normal situations, say, ordinary situations, and extreme situations.
And by limiting surely the extreme deviation from what is ordinarily thought to be
natural right to extreme situations, he would avoid the relativism. In other words, here we
reach a point, if we think that through, where we come across Hobbes’s problem. If you
have something like a state of nature, a state of complete anarchy where everyone lies in
the trenches not only against the enemy on the other side but everywhere around there are
enemies, what chances are there of any justice being practiced among men? Of course
Hobbes says justice is simply a human invention to avoid this predicament and to give
security of life. But some awareness of the problem—you must never forget that the
classic natural law doctrine, by which I understand the Thomistic natural doctrine,
presupposes the Christian doctrine of providence, of creation, and therefore of a perfect
beginning of mankind: paradise. Now true original sin is crucial. But original sin is man’s
responsibility, that is not God’s responsibility. Now for Aristotle there is no such perfect
beginning. In practical terms, you have these cataclysms, say, every few millennia or
whatever the periods may be, and then men begin from savage barbarism again, where
you cannot reasonably expect any civility, any civilization. An example which you find
in Plato of this early barbarism is the Cyclopic society, you know these Homeric
one-eyed brutes: this is what you had at the beginning,xiii and it takes a certain
considerable development until the minimum conditions of justice are fulfilled. Classic
natural law, to repeat, presupposes the doctrine of providence and presupposes the
doctrine of a perfect beginning. And this doctrine of the perfect beginning is not the
Platonic–Aristotelian teaching, and therefore it is not so clear and simple as the doctrine
would seem to be in Thomas Aquinas. Mr. Shulsky?
Mr. Shulsky: What is the relation between Aristotle’s view of equity and the view you
read from the Laws? It seems to be an opposite, Aristotle talking about equity as being
something higher than the simply just because it’s a correction of it, a rectification, and
somewhat higher . . . Plato seems . . .
LS: Yes, but we have seen in the Ethics, in an earlier passage in the Ethics, about two
pages earlier, where Aristotle makes a distinction between the just, what is legally just,
and what is just in the first sense, and where the just in the first sense is also the severe,
uncompromising just.
Mr. Shulsky: So that equity lies somewhere between those . . .
xiii

See Plato, Republic 441b-c.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

426

LS: Yes.
Mr. Shulsky: . . .
LS: For Aristotle, I mean, in the section on equity itself, equity is clearly an improvement
on the positive law. In other words, the equitable decision is better than the mere
inference from the law, from the text of the law, to the case at hand.
Mr. Shulsky: But putting those two sections together now, the question would then seem
to be, What is the relation between the first justice and the lawgiver? Because if there’s a
certain common lower ground—
LS: The first justice is not one which is dependent on the lawgiver; that would be
something like natural right, intrinsically right. I mean, this whole point, this difficulty to
which you allude is the one regarding Aristotle’s teaching on natural right altogether. I
mean, perhaps the passage in itself is interpretable, but if you raise the question why it
comes up in this context, then you see how immense the difficulties are.
So if there are no further points, I would like now to do my sworn duty and return the rest
of the papers. Mr. Persons? He’s not here. Well, he says here somewhere, “One might
argue that the near-blind man”—this is on Aristotle’s doctrine of contemplative life—
“the near-blind man cannot possibly exercise the faculty of sight, so as to obtain pleasure
from doing so. This point is a point that is critical to the final conclusion that Aristotle is
leading to.” Yes, but I do not see what the point of the critique is. Mr. Persons being
absent, we will not get any explanation unless some one of you thinks along Mr.
Persons’s lines.
Mr. King? “By leisure it is meant that condition of having arrived at a goal, achieved an
end of an activity, and having nothing further to do.” Is this [the] correct Aristotelian
view, if you have nothing further to do, then you have leisure? No, your true activity
begins there. The other activities are mere business, but this activity is higher. Ya. “The
intellectual part of man is without substance or complexity.” Aristotle says it is without
bulk. I have seen in these papers again, as I saw in quite a few others, a great propensity
of the students to prefer the complicated and fundamentally nonintelligible words to the
simple and intelligible words, and it is strange. Hard to explain that.
Mr. Mahoney, you refer here to a question about the translation of a passage of the Ethics
where one translator says “law” and another translator says “convention.” There is no
difference; you can translate it [either way]. It concerns a passage regarding money.
Student: There isn’t a difference to the Greeks, but there is to Americans.
LS: Ya, all right, but what is a contemporary phenomenon which Aristotle has in mind?
That money depends on human arbitrariness. We have first the rare metals, say, gold.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

427

And the value of gold does not depend on human arrangement; that has to do with the
qualities which gold naturally possesses. Where does the convention or the law come in?
Student: Well, in the case . . . the only reason that gold can be used as money is that the
people agree that it can.
LS: Yes, but where is the agreement necessary? Agreement is not necessary as to gold
being a particularly valuable metal, because that is obviously so. And there might be
practical reasons speaking for silver against gold; that’s another matter. But think of the
difference between dollar and pound sterling: is this in the nature of gold, this distinction,
or is it not a manmade distinction? Or [the] French franc, or whatever else you take. I
think that is what Aristotle has in mind. In other words, just as language is necessarily
this or that language, and therefore conventional, in the same way money is necessarily
this or that or that currency, and therefore conventional . . .
Mr. Lehman? Here in your paper I found quite a few examples where you spoke of
“logical” (which seems to be a favorite expression of yours) where “reasonable” or
“orderly” would perfectly do. I mean, in other words, a man presents an “orderly”
argument, lucid, clear, plausible; whereas “logical” has so many different connotations
that angels might be able to use it. [Laughter] “Rectificatory justice is not as high as
distributive justice, because it aims at maintaining the proportions determined by
distributive justice.” Well, that is partly correct and partly not. In what sense is this
correct?
Student: On the whole, rectificatory justice is really aimed at reestablishing the
proportion, the sense of justice that existed before you had . . .
LS: Not the sense of justice, the just relationships.
Student: Yeah, the relationships between persons of certain worth and what they get and
certain persons of another worth—
LS: Yes, not only worth: for example, if someone hits another man, there is no question
of the worth of the two, as we have learned, but it is simply that there is a disturbance,
because the beater has satisfaction in addition to his previous state, and the other has
annoyance in addition to his previous state. And there must be a rectification so that the
man who has satisfaction will be deprived of the satisfaction, and the man who has
annoyance will be compensated for his annoyance. But nevertheless, there is something
in what you say, that this kind of justice in rectification, commutative justice, is not as
high as distributive justice. You remember Plato’s Republic, book 2, a very well-known
passage on the city of pigs?xiv They have commerce, haven’t they? They exchange goods
and services. Yes. Now then, therefore there is justice there. At least there should be
justice there. There is justice, in fact, but this is only a very low city, and there is no place
there for distributive justice, because all live on one level. And in Aristotle it’s a bit more
complicated to show, but similar considerations apply to Aristotle as well. I’m sorry that
xiv

See Plato, Republic 372d.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

428

you are the innocent victim of my pedantism. “Distributive justice,” you say, “would
seem to be the highest form of particular justice.” I think that’s fair to say. “No one
would say it were just for a man to be forced to trade fifty diamonds for fifty stones, at
least if he knows what diamonds and stones are. Likewise, most would not say that both
the winner of a race and the loser should be honored equally, although a few might say
so.” What would be the reasoning of these few?
Student: Well, you know, it’s not whether you win or lose, but that you ran a good race,
or something like that. We often hear this.
LS: Oh, I see, in this sense. But still, there is of course a rationale for honoring remains,
in order to encourage.
Student: There’s the benefit of just running the race for your own health.
LS: Oh, I see. Yes, then it would no longer—
Student: Some people would say that just because you ran it for itself—
LS: Yes, then it would no longer be a race properly speaking. [Laughter] Now we come
to Mr. Wright, who honors us by his absence, so there is nothing. Mr. Arthur: “The most
important of these distinctions is the division of particular justice into the distributive
component and the commutative–rectificatory component. In actual practice these
components are indeed separate, as they are here in conceptualization.” What does this
last sentence mean? I mean, say, an act of purchase, of buying and selling, or an act of
mayhem, can occur perfectly independently of an act of awarding honors.
Student: If you look at the orientation of the polis, you can say that . . . distributive
justice . . . and the commutative has to do with these one-to-one human transactions.
LS: No, I had only in mind—I did not quite see what the term “conceptualization” meant.
Student: Oh . . . Aristotle suggests . . .
LS: Oh, I see. Mr. Reynolds? I should know you by now . . . “Within a polis, what is by
nature right and what is legally right coincide. This is the core of Aristotle’s teaching on
natural right.”
Student: That’s taken out of the preface to the argument.
LS: I see. You would not assert that this is so?
Same Student: That is not the way it ends.
LS: Yes. You speak later on of this, Aristotle’s systemized presentation, which is a kind
of crossbreed of Aristotle and a certain kind of modern political science theory, I believe.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

429

Yes? System building. But still, “what is by nature right and what is legally right coincide
in a manner.” That is somehow what Aristotle has to say about that.
And now we come to Mr. Laughton. Absent again.5
Next time we should take the most important passages from book 6 about this question:
what is the cognitive status of the moral principles, according to Aristotle? How do we
know that magnanimity is noble, and that this and this is a magnanimous action, and so
on and so on? And we will read these; these are chiefly the passages dealing with moral
virtue, the relation of moral virtue and phronēsis, practical wisdom. We will do that next
time. Yes?
Student: I’m still confused on the point about natural justice. As I understand it, natural
justice for Aristotle is literally the mean necessary for the political life, and therefore can
be almost infinite.
LS: This is one possible interpretation, ya. I inferred this from these examples implied in
this section, for example, the worshiping of the gods and ransoming prisoners: that there
would be some conditions which a polis must fulfill if it is to keep together at all.
Student: Then how could that, say, be used, as you say that Aristotle said, as a standard
on which equity depends?
LS: I said equity does not require such a standard. I said the standard for equity is the
intention of the legislator, of the positive legislator.
Student: Oh, I see, okay. That makes sense.
LS: I mean, it is easy to bring together equity with natural law; that is what Thomas
Aquinas does. But I don’t think that this is justified by the Aristotelian text.
Student: But then the legislator does not look at natural justice as a standard either.
LS: In a way he must. I mean, after all, if he wants to have a workable society he must—
Same Student: But not if the laws . . .
LS: I beg your pardon?
Same Student: Not if laws are proof of natural justice.
LS: No, he will go beyond them, but he will not on the other hand constantly contradict
the minimum requirement of . . . Yes?
Student: I heard a rumor that . . . intro to political philosophy . . .

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

430

LS: Is this a rumor? [Laughter] Yes, well, I think I hadn’t announced it, because I
announced originally something else . . . Yes, I plan to give a course, a one-year course
consisting of two parts, on Socrates’s trial as a kind of case study [laughter] in political
philosophy. Yes, that’s . . .
Student: While I was working on my paper, I couldn’t come to any satisfactory
conclusion on what Aristotle was trying to do with what we know today as criminal law.
I mean, under commutative justice, he suggests how someone might go about getting or
paying a remedy for some wrong that has been committed, but he never really speaks
about punishments of persons commiting what we would call a criminal act.
Another Student: . . .
LS: Yes, well he speaks quite a few times, you only have to—well, let us see here, in the
Bywater edition, which has a reasonably decent index, under the Greek word for
punishing, kolazein, how often he speaks of it: about ten, twelve times. So he speaks of it.
Surely he speaks about it. But you are interested in something else: a detailed justification
of why is punishment a reasonable action. In Plato we have this developed doctrine:
punishment is primarily for the purpose of betterment, or in hopeless cases for
eradication. You know? I mentioned this on an earlier occasion in this course. Aristotle is
perfectly satisfied with a much more “naïve” view. There is a dissatisfaction on the part
of the sufferer, and the sufferer must be compensated for that dissatisfaction. One can
develop that. Aristotle to my knowledge has never done it. But I know from Hugo
Grotius, for example, that there is a certain pleasure which the harmed man enjoys from
seeing his harmer punished. xv I mean, whether he is hanged, drawn and quartered, or only
put into jail, that depends on taste and occasion. But, generally speaking, this was
formerly taken for granted: that punishment is not merely a measure for improving the
character of the criminal, but also for giving some, let us say, emotional satisfaction. Is
this word acceptable to you?
Student: Yes, I would think the polis would also want to experience that emotional
satisfaction.
LS: Yes, sure. But the polis also owes something to its citizens. You know? I mean, if the
polis is emotionally satisfied as a whole and its members are all emotionally dissatisfied,
this is not a good thing, as Aristotle says against Plato. You know? And then he says that
if all the citizens are unhappy and yet the polis as a whole should be happy, this doesn’t
work, because happiness is not like odd numbers. Three plus five is eight, an even
number, but you cannot compose happiness out of unhappy parts.
Student: But we’re going to only make one or two individuals unhappy at a time; this is
not a—

See the discussion in Hugo Grotius, “On Punishments,” in De jure belli ac pacis libri tres, book
2, chapter 20.
xv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

431

LS: Yes, sure. But still the polis of course comes over the whole thing and doesn’t permit
the individual harmed to be the sole judge of what emotional satisfaction he wants. Of
course not. The polis determines what emotional satisfaction is due to him. So let us say
not drawn and quartered, but only hanged until he is dead. Or similar . . . Yes?
Student: . . . consideration of deterrence as a justification for punishment?
LS: Aristotle does not speak of that, as far as I remember particularly. It is a very obvious
thought, but I don’t think he emphasizes that. But that without punishment in the
background, and therefore without potential punishment and therefore also from time to
time actual punishment, people will be uncontrollable: that is so obvious for Aristotle, as
it is for Plato. So punishment is an indispensable institution. In other words, the polis is
necessarily a coercive institution. He uses very strong terms when he speaks of the
defects of paternal upbringing. The paternal discipline lacks the coercive force which the
polis with its laws with teeth in them has. And the father is of course also frequently very
compassionate with his good-for-nothing son, and the polis is not famous for its
compassion, at least in olden times. Yes?
Same Student: It seems barbaric to set up institutions where it’s expected that you get
enjoyment out of the harm of another man.
LS: Yes, but still, on the other hand, I mean, the harmed man is also a man.
Same Student: The harmed, the victim.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: But why should the basis of punishment be the satisfaction that he gets at
seeing another man harmed? This seems to be an encouragement of this sort of
phenomenon, which in itself is—as far as I am concerned, it is an ignoble aspect of
human nature.
LS: Yes, you aren’t the only one who says it. Plato himself says it, at least through the
mouth of Protagoras in the Protagoras, but also elsewhere: that a reasonable man
punishes only for a reasonable purpose. And the reasonable purpose would be to improve
the lawbreaker. And the other [purpose], merely to get it out of your system, that is not a
rational act. That is clear. But Aristotle remains closer to ordinary mankind, humanity, as
he does in so many other ways, by simply saying that people would think [that] if they
cannot harm those who harm them nor do well to those who did well to them, they would
regard themselves as slaves. Slavish condition. This kind of satisfaction in good or ill is
necessary for a healthy life, that is what these people would say. And Aristotle would say
to Plato, probably, if he had the courage to figure out an argument . . . would say: “You
aim too high, Plato. This is there, will always be there.” To say nothing of other problems
into which Plato comes with his doctrine of punishment. The Platonic doctrine would
lead to the consequence that the incorrigible lawbreaker will be thrown out of the city,
which means for all practical purposes [that] he will be killed. What will you do with

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

432

that? I mean, there were no theories available as we have them today. We say there is no
man who cannot be improved. Plato took a tougher line. He saw the hardened criminals
and black sheep where nothing could be done, and left it at that.
Same Student: But that is not so much a defect of Plato’s theory as it is perhaps a
difference in understanding of our capability—
LS: It is a defect of the theory for the following reason. Let us assume we have a
murderer. I mean, not a man who killed another man in anger, but a real murder, a
premeditated murder: Raskolnikov. And then Raskolnikov afterward, as you all know, as
soon as he had this bit of money, he saw that it was a very foolish thing for him to do,
and he would have been very grateful to get rid both of the money and of the guilt. Now
why should this man be sent for ten, twenty years to Siberia, not to say to be executed,
because he has learned his lesson in Moscow or wherever it was? Pardon? Or was it St.
Petersburg? St. Petersburg. [It was] a long time [ago] that I read it. Now let us take the
case of the petty thief, who commits one act of petty thievery after the other and never
goes through this purgating experience through which Raskolnikov went. What shall we
do with such a fellow? He’s an incorrigible criminal. Then, according to this Platonic
principle, he must be thrown out to the wolves, whereas Raskolnikov will be accepted in
good graces. Now of course that is very uncommonsensical. We simply say [that] we
consider, in establishing measures for crimes, not only the degree of guilt of the criminal
but also the quality of the act. Is it something like murder, or is it petty theft? Petty theft
is such a trivial thing, no one could think—at least no civilized man could think of having
a man hanged for petty theft, even if he commits it fifty times. But still, the Platonic
doctrine, as he stated it, is open to this question. For Aristotle, there would be no
difficulty to say: of course we have to consider the degree of guilt as well as the degree of
the damage. Mr. Pangle?
Mr. Pangle: In the Averroistic interpretation of the passage on natural right, what place
in the doctrine of natural right does the best regime have? Or is it—
LS: Yes, that is hard to say. You see, there is a law which is universally observed, not of
course by all individuals, but by all political societies. And this law . . . with the
minimum requirements. He enumerates some of these things, and this corresponds more
or less to what I sketched when we spoke of this passage. So well, generally speaking,
there is no natural law in the Stoic–Thomistic sense of the word either in Plato or
Aristotle, or in the Averroistic tradition. That is the peculiarity of that Latin tradition, one
can say. There were Greek Stoics also, but the Stoics had a great influence on Roman
thought, and in particular Roman legal thought.
Student: Well, then is Marsilius just silent about the best regime when he speaks of
justice . . .
LS: Explicitly, yes. But if one reads it more carefully, I think one gets a certain notion of
what he understands by the best regime: it would be a city aristocratically governed. I
think one can say that. That is at least the result of my last reading. 6

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

433

So then we meet Wednesday at 3 for the last meeting of this class.
1

Deleted “that which is equitable.”
Moved “a nomos.”
3
Moved “therefore.”
4
Deleted “especially.”
5
Deleted “There are also some stylistic things . . . And we still have almost half an hour which we should
not waste. There are two possibilities, either we—I close class now, or else we have a discussion, a kind of
free-for-all, not in preparation for examination because if I’m not mistaken there is only a single student
among you who will undergo the final examination. Is this still . . .
2

Student: . . . reconsidering writing a paper.
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: I think it would maybe . . . had to write a paper instead of taking . . . final examination.
LS: Yes, it is possible. [Laughter.] But when would you hand it in?
Same Student: Well, when is the deadline? Have we already past it?
LS: Wednesday.
Same Student: This Wednesday.
LS: Yes.
Same Student: And when would be the final examination [inaudible]?
LS: I think I announced that: on the seventh.
Same Student: [Inaudible]
LS: No, [the] ninth is commencement. The examination was set to take place on Friday the seventh, at 2
PM. I think you’ll take the [Inaudible] examination on Friday, the seventh. Well, next time I thought we
should not [Inaudible] reading [inaudible] today.”
6
Deleted “Now let me return the papers- Now, let me first return the papers to those who are here. Lawton?
Mr. Reynolds? Mr. Arthur? Mr. Wright? Mr. Lehman? Mr. Mahoney? Mr. King? No? And Mr. Persons
also not there.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

434

Session 24: May 28, 1968i
Leo Strauss: Now let us turn now to the sixth book of the Ethics. Now Aristotle opens
this book in about this manner. We have seen that the good man is the man who chooses
the mean correctly. And the mean is that what right [. . .] says it is. We can say the
verdict of reason, meaning what the verdict of reason declares it to be: this is the target at
which one must look in determining one’s choice. But this is of course too general. One
reason: because it applies to the arts as well as to the virtues. It applies as well to the
carpenter or to the housebuilder: not too much, not too little, and so on. Therefore a new
investigation is necessary, and that is what this book is devoted to. We will begin at the
beginning, 1138b35, and in some editions, chapter 2.
Reader:
Now we have divided the Virtues of the Soul into two groups, the Virtues of the
Character and the Virtues of the Intellect. The former, the Moral Virtues, we have already
discussed. Our account of the latter must be prefaced by some remarks about psychology.
LS: Well, “about the soul.” There is an inclination not only of students but also of
professors that, if there is a choice between simple words and the technical words, they
prefer the technical words. Psychology is the science or the study of the soul, but
Aristotle does not speak about the study of the soul; he speaks about the soul.
Reader:
It has been said before that the soul has two parts, one rational and the other irrational.
Let us now similarly divide the rational part, and let it be assumed that there are two
rational faculties, one whereby we contemplate those things whose first principles are
invariable, and one whereby we contemplate those things which admit of variation: since,
on the assumption that knowledge is based on a likeness or affinity of some sort between
subject and object, the parts of the soul adapted to the cognition of objects that are of
different kinds must themselves differ in kind. (1138b35-1139a11)
LS: There is of course nothing of “subject” and “object” in Aristotle. It is convenient for
the translator to use these terms and to avoid the seemingly more complicated previous
questions which strictly speaking correspond to subject and object.
Reader:

i

At the end of session 23 as it appears in this transcript, Strauss indicates that the next class
meeting will be the last. What we have included here as session 24 appears as session 16 in the
original transcript. It was however out of place there because the subject matter, a discussion of
prudence in book 6, follows from the discussion of book 5 in session 23. Hence we have included
this as a separate session and the penultimate session, though it is possible that it was part of an
extended last class meeting. There is no audio recording of this session. The transcript of this
session is taken from the original transcript. Ellipses in the original transcript have been
preserved. Where the transcriber noted “inaudible,” ellipses appear in square brackets.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

435

These two rational faculties may be designated the Scientific Faculty and the Calculative
Faculty respectively; since calculation is the same as deliberation, and deliberation is
never exercised about things that are invariable, so that the Calculative Faculty is a
separate part of the rational half of the soul.
We have therefore to ascertain what disposition of each of these faculties is the best, for
that will be the virtue of each. (1139a11-16)
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. Aristotle must make clear to us the difference
between the choice of the mean in the arts and the choice of the mean in action. But he
has to put his [. . .] on a broader basis, so he begins first with a new distinction within the
rational part. There is a “scientific” part, [as] we can translate it, and there is the
calculating part. The scientific part deals with what is unchangeable, with what is always
the same; and the calculating or deliberative part deals with what is essentially
changeable. Is this distinction familiar to you? You must have heard of it. Not all of you,
perhaps, but many of you. [Remember] Plato’s Republic: there is the divided line.ii There
is the science of what is always the same and never changeable, and then there is
something else, which Plato calls opinion. Here Aristotle doesn’t speak of opinion, but
later on in this book [he speaks] occasionally, as it were, of what he calls here the
calculating part [as] the opining part.
Student: It would seem to me that the calculating or deliberating part, at least the way it
is used in the divided line image, would belong to the third level of [. . .] that faculty
which is capable of making distinctions. In other words, it has the faculty of both going
onwards and upwards as well as to make deduction toward the lower.
LS: But in the divided line, is it not essential to connect the reference to the changeable
things? Don’t you, in numbering, deal with pure numbers? Do you not have the relation
to the things numbered? And the same applies naturally to geometry.
Same Student: That’s true. I was just wondering how you put the calculating and
deliberating part exclusively in the area of opinion.
LS: Partly based on the fact that Aristotle himself uses the word [. . .] for what he calls
here logistikon.
Same Student: But my only observation is that Plato puts it above the half, in other
words, in the third part.
LS: Sure. Both are not sense perception, that goes without saying. Neither are they here.
Both are rational faculties.
Student: [. . .]

ii

Plato, Republic 509d-511e.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

436

LS: The spheres in which the stars move, they are unchangeable. But the species are
[also] unchangeable. Every cat grows and decays and dies, but the species of cat is
always, was always, and always will be, and therefore the biologists up to the present day
speak of the species “cat” and not of this here cat. I mean, whereas the cat lover, the cat
owner, is concerned with the individual cat, the biologist is not concerned with this here
cat, except accidentally, because it may give him an occasion for studying something
about cattishness. So the distinction still prevails in spite of the great changes which have
taken place. Now this distinction between the scientific and the calculating part is not
sufficient, because we want to understand the difference between the virtues and the arts.
And the virtues and the arts would both have to do with the latter, with the calculating
part, and therefore Aristotle introduces now a somewhat different consideration in a17.
Reader:
But the virtue of a faculty is related to the special function which that faculty performs.
Now there are three elements in the soul which control action and the attainment of truth:
namely perception,iii Intellect, and Desire.
LS: “Perception” means here sense perception.
Reader:
Of these perception never originates affairs, as is shown by the fact that animals have
perception but do not participate in affairs. iv
LS: “Affairs” means action.
Reader:
Pursuit and avoidance in the sphere of Desire correspond to affirmation and denial in the
sphere of the Intellect. Hence inasmuch as moral virtue is a disposition in the mind in
regard to choice, and choice is deliberate desire, it follows that, if the choice is to be
good, both the principle must be true and the desire right, and that desire must pursue the
same things as principle affirms. We are here speaking of practical thinking. (1139a1627)
LS: So Aristotle makes here, apparently without making clear why, the distinction 1 not
within the rational part itself, but between reason and desire. And [he] makes here one
point: in the good action reason must be active in this way and culminates in a true
verdict, and the desire must be correct, so much so that there must be a harmony [such]
that what the verdict of reason points to and what the desire aims at [must] be identical.
This is a kind of prefiguration [of] what2 the difference between the arts and the virtues
is: in the arts, the desire does not play a role, as we shall see later.

iii

In Rackham’s translation: “Sensation.”
In Rackham’s translation: “Of these, Sensation never originates action, as is shown by the fact
that animals have sensation but are not capable of action.”
iv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

437

Student: Is it sort of the attempt which Socrates makes at the end of book 4 about
spiritedness and reason [. . .] It seems to be a problematic attempt . . . of course he is
going to outline it further, but it seems like kind of a shaky starting point.
LS: You say Aristotle should have given us a reason why he decides to speak of this
here. But since his object is to make clear still more what moral virtue is than anything
else, and moral virtue has a rational ingredient, it is impossible to be a good man without
being a man of judgment. But moral virtue also has another ingredient which we would
say today has to do with the will. But Aristotle says there is desire or striving. This has to
be considered from every point of view. There is nothing improper in that, although the
transition is [. . .] not smooth. Now let us read the sequel.
Reader:
We are here speaking of practical thinking, and of the attainment of truth in regard to
action; [with speculative thought, which is not concerned with action or production, right
and wrong functioning consist in the attainment of truth and falsehood respectively. The
attainment of]v truth is indeed the function of every part of the intellect, but that of the
practical intelligence is the attainment of truth corresponding to right desire.
LS: Aristotle makes now explicit what he had not 3 [made explicit] before, that he is
dealing with the difference between theoretical and practical; theoretical [or] scientific
[and] practical; between theoretical truth and practical truth; [or], more precisely,
between truth and correctness. In the theoretical reason, the good, the excellence, is the
truth. In the practical, the good consists of harmony with right desire. Perhaps we can
explain this as follows. I know that it is wrong to steal. I know it, but I have a desire to
steal. Here the knowledge is obviously not enough. This knowledge does not make my
viewing of the situation good; my viewing of the overall situation is good only if my
desire is also correct. So it is then necessary for moral virtue [that there be] a cooperation
of desire and reason or intellect. Aristotle will speak about this in the sequel.
Reader:
Now the cause of actions (the efficient, not the final cause) is choice, and the cause of
choice is desire and reasoning directed at some end. Hence choice necessarily involves
both intellect or thought and a certain disposition of character [for doing well and the
reverse in the sphere of action necessarily involves thought and character]. vi (1139a2735)
Thought by itself however proves nothing, but only practical thought directed to an end.
LS: Now is this clear, or do we have difficulties?
Student: What do you make of that statement in the light of his later comment [. . .] It
would seem that the man who is devoted to the ultimately good life is, in the light of this
passage at any rate, exercising a mind in an essentially useless pursuit.
v
vi

The bracketed section of this passage is omitted in the original transcription.
The punctuation is Rackham’s.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

438

LS: On the basis of what particular remark?
Student: In the passage about thought by itself not meaning anything.
LS: But he strives for knowledge first. Is there not then some striving here? And when
the striving has come to its fulfillment, then there is indeed no longer any need for this
striving, and there is perfect contentment and satisfaction. We discussed this question last
time or the time before in a somewhat different form. Now let us go on.
Reader:
Indeed, the moving cause of productive activity is this also.vii
LS: Productive activity in contradistinction to practicalness.
Reader:
Since he who makes something always has some further end in view: the act of making is
not an end in itself, it is only a means, and belongs to something else.
LS: We do not need that now, because Aristotle will speak of that later. The main point is
this: that practical action is radically different from production. In production, something
is produced which survives the production . . . In practice, the end is the action itself. The
shoemaker does this work in order to bring about a shoe; and when the shoe is produced,
his shoemaking becomes wholly uninteresting. But in the case of action, it is the action
and the action alone which is intended. Let us turn to 1139b14.
Reader:
Let us then discuss these virtues afresh, going more deeply into the matter.
LS: So in other words, Aristotle is now again enlarging the issue, because the clarity he
has given us hitherto is insufficient [regarding] the difference between moral virtue and
the arts.
Reader:
Let it be assumed that there are five qualities through which the mind achieves truth in
affirmation or denial, namely, Art or technical skill, Scientific Knowledge, truth, viii
Wisdom, and Intelligence. Conception and Opinion are capable of error.
The nature of Scientific Knowledge (employing the term in its exact sense regarding its
analogous uses) may be made clear as follows. We all conceive that a thing which we
know scientifically cannot vary; when a thing that can vary is beyond the range of our
observation, we do not know whether it exists or not. An object of Scientific Knowledge,
therefore, exists of necessity. It is therefore eternal, for everything existing of absolute
vii
viii

In Rackham’s translation: “This indeed is the moving cause of productive activity also.”
In Rackham’s translation: “Prudence.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

439

necessity is eternal; and what is eternal does not come into existence or perish. (1139b124)
LS: Let us stop here. So there are five faculties through which the soul grasps the truth
which are intrinsically truthful [in] the way in which opinion is not. Opinion can be true
or false opinion equally well, but science cannot be true or false science; nor can
prudence or practical wisdom be true or false practical wisdom. The science then applies
to the other things mentioned here.
We naturally begin again as we did before, with science as the matter of the greatest
importance. Now we skip the sequel and also the next chapter which is devoted to the
difference between art and action [and proceed to the difference] between art and
practical wisdom, because [that is] what we need for our understanding today and in later
passages. We turn now to 1140a24.
Reader:
We may arrive at a definition of Prudence by considering who are the persons whom we
call prudent. Now it is held to be the mark of a prudent man to be able to deliberate well
about what is good and advantageous for himself, not in some one department,
for instance what is good for his health or strength, but what is advantageous as a means
to the good life in general. (1140a24-28)
LS: What is good with a view to life as a whole. So what then is the prudent man? He
deliberates well about his life as a whole. For example, he would not deliberate well
about the building of a house because that would be done much better by a housebuilder,
or (Aristotle’s example) about health; this is better done by a physician. But [he
deliberates well about] his life as a whole. Needless to say that this deliberating well
implies that he [acts] on it, because if a man deliberates well but acts poorly then no one
would call him a sensible man. One would find him a very strange man, that he knows so
very well what should be done and does in each case the opposite. So the deliberation
includes the decision. Now it is what—life as a whole, in contradistinction to any partial
consideration.
Student: He does not seem to arrive at a conclusion about it, except for some tentative
ideas . . .
LS: Yes, you mean, namely, when he discusses about being happy and this kind of thing.
Student: There seems to be a dividing line divided in two parts: one part, the faculty all
of the arts can cover, and the rest would be a principle which included that and would go
beyond that.
LS: This is not practical enough. Give us an example of the kinds of questions a prudent
man would settle by himself where he does not go to an expert.
Student: [. . .]

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

440

LS: There is also private life with great possibilities of acting prudently and imprudently.
Student: First of all, it would be how one lives his life.
LS: Except this is very general.
Student: Taking a bath, for example, and not putting in too much hot water and cold
water, and finding a mean between the hot and the cold water.
LS: A bathmaster would do this much better. For example, the question: should he
marry? And should he marry Miss A or Miss B? That would concern his life as a whole,
unless you regard marriage as a strictly temporary arrangement, and then it does not
matter.
Student: But what about marriage [. . . ]
LS: That is a question, but Aristotle implies “no.” The decision must be settled by a
prudent man himself, because otherwise [a] man would declare himself bankrupt from
the point of view of prudence, saying: “I am incapable of taking care of my own affairs
and I have to have someone else.” It could also be: should he have a country house and a
house in town? This is not the question for the architect to decide. And others: what kind
of education should he give to his children? There he can perhaps have expert advice. But
to whom he will go as an expert? This is already the question where prudence would
come in. In other words, the expertise is here not so obvious as in the case of medicine
and architecture. Now . . .
Reader:
This is proved by the fact that we also speak of people as prudent or wise in some
particular thing, when they calculate well with a view to attaining some particularly
serious end (other than those ends which have as an object an art). ix (1140a28-30)
LS: Now what does he mean by this remark? That prudence comes into play where art,
let alone science, is of no help. Let us speak of hunting; a good instinct, a hunting dog.
Here we see the difficulty which we have and to which some of you have alluded. In our
age and already for some time we have [had] the tendency to replace prudence ever more
with art, even perhaps regarding matters like marriage [so] that the marriage counselor
takes the place of the prudent man or woman, or many other things. But the difficulty
which comes up here is this: if we think through the possibility of a complete
technicization of life along the modern lines, we have then one limitation, [one] admitted
limitation of the applied sciences, and that is that the value judgment cannot be settled by
the technician. The technician couldn’t tell you [that] you should you marry or not,
because this would depend on certain value judgments. But if you have a desire, [he
could tell you that] the chances that you will get along well with this kind of woman [are]
ix

In Rackham’s translation: “attaining some particular end of value (other than those ends which
are the object of an art).”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

441

greater than with that kind of woman. But ultimately and radically there remains a
difficulty regarding the value judgment.
Student: [. . .]
LS: But Aristotle makes it so easy when he brings up the question of marriage to forget
love . . .
Same Student: But how does it relate to love?
LS: I cannot help remembering the passage in the Politics when he speaks about
marriage.x Thirty-five and eighteen are the respective ages, and I think the notion is that
love will come after the consummation of marriage, not before, out of common
experience and so, rather than [being] puppy-like.
Student: [. . .]
LS: Who would be Machiavellian in marrying? And who would want to marry to get
money, power, or connections, and the happiness of the wife is of no consideration
whatever? But Aristotle thinks of course of something different: it is a marriage which
will have the properness as it will for children, for future citizens. And this is not a
Machiavellian consideration.
Student: I don’t see why a specialist in such things as marriages can’t serve as well as
the individual people.
LS: But the question is, where does this counselor get his value?
Student: From the analysis of the projected means, not only of the individual but of
society.
LS: The means, I suppose, as they are understood by that society.
Student: Yes.
LS: And the point is: with what right can he do that as a scientific man? The American
marriage counsellor will have different advice than the French marriage counsellor.
Student: [. . .]
LS: For Aristotle it is all right because it is a matter of practical wisdom. But if we speak
of science, then these differences should not play such a fundamental role.
Student: But what of the importance of the prudent man’s abilities seeming to be limited
to his own life?
x

Aristotle, Politics 1335a24-35.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

442

LS: Oh no, that comes in later.
Student: [. . .]
LS: But of course he will stay out of political decisions or decisions referring to the polis.
The relation of prudence to politics will be taken up later. But, for example, he has
enough money to have a [. . .] event or whatever it may be. Which of these things should
he do? This decision is not a technical decision. The technical decisions will come in
[. . .] But whether [he should do] this or that, that is not a technical decision. It is a
decision with a view to what the city is most in need of, and what would adorn the city to
the highest degree.
Student: Wouldn’t the man who is best able to make this decision [be] best able to give
advice to friends?
LS: But there is only this point. There are people who are better in advising others than in
advising themselves. The prudent man belongs perhaps to the man advising himself,
because if you do not have the burden, the responsibility, you are less bound by the
responsibility, and it is from this point of view easier to advise. So the prudent man
belongs perhaps to the man advising himself and not the man advising others. Now
1140a30. “So altogether the prudent man would be the man good at deliberating.”
Reader:
But no one deliberates about things that cannot vary, nor about things not within his
power. Hence inasmuch as scientific knowledge involves demonstration, whereas things
whose fundamental principles are variable are not capable of demonstration, because
everything about them is variable, and inasmuch as one cannot deliberate about things
that are of necessity, it follows that Prudence is not the same as Science. Nor can it be the
same as Art. It is not Science, because matters of conduct admit of variation; and not Art,
because doing and making are generically different, since making aims at an end distinct
from the act of making, whereas in doing the end cannot be other than the act itself: doing
well is itself the end. (1140a30-b4)
LS: Let us stop here. So in practical wisdom, doing well in the sense of acting well is
itself the end; whereas in art, as we have said before, the product as distinguished from
the productive activity is the end. For instance, not the desirable consequences [of]
courteous conduct but courteous conduct itself is the end. The consequences of courteous
conduct are by no means irrelevant, but they are not the end.
Student: Is this identification of art and production Aristotle’s last word? Because it
would seem there could be something which could be called art and would not be strictly
speaking production.
LS: If you take such an activity as poetry, for instance, is there not a product?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

443

Student: In this case . . .
LS: The Iliad is something different from Homer’s [activity of] making. Now is the song
sung something different [from the singing of it]? Here you cannot make that distinction.
The song sung is implied in the singing.
Student: I don’t understand. Are you saying that there is a difference between flute
playing and poetry writing? In other words, one is a thing in itself and the other produces
something. Flute playing produces something.
LS: What does it produce?
Student: It produces two things. It produces in the first place music, and it produces in
one way or another a music which has a result in the mind of the listener.
LS: Yes, and it is intended for this purpose. And this is probably the way in which
Aristotle would argue. Aristotle would probably argue along these lines.
Student: . . . that flute playing is actually production. Doesn’t he use that example at the
beginning of the Ethics, in the few pages where he has flute playing and production . . .
LS: But this is of course a preliminary distinction.
Reader:
It remains therefore that it is a truth-attaining rational quality, concerned with action in
relation to things that are good and bad for human beings.4 Hence men like Pericles are
deemed prudent because they possess a faculty of discerning what things are good for
themselves and for mankind; and that is our conception of an expert in Domestic
Economy or Political Science.
LS: Now what does it mean—I mean, that Pericles was a sensible man? Pericles was an
emphatically sensible man; this is the impression we all get when we read [. . .]. But
Aristotle gives a peculiar interpretation to this sensibility: Pericles was a man who was
able to grasp what was good for him and for human beings in general. And would this not
make prudence something very selfish, that he was able to discover what was good for
him[self]? And is it not much more important to discern what was good for Athens? How
would Aristotle explain that? His activity for Athens is the meaning of Pericles’s whole
life, and therefore there is nothing selfish involved in this. One can also think of the
passage in the [funeral] speech: “We love wisdom with [thrift] and we love the beautiful
without softness.”xi This is the maxim to which Pericles dedicated himself and his
Athens. And this end was not for the sake of something else; it was of course meant to be
that having dedicated yourself to these, it was of course meant to be good for Athens, but
this end in itself was no longer in need of another end or justification.
Reader:
xi

Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, 2.40.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

444

This also accounts for the word moderation, xii which signifies ‘preserving prudence.’
(1140b4-12)
LS: This is a kind of etymological play on the part of Aristotle, [although] Aristotle
probably did not think it was mere play. The Greek word sōphrosynē, which we
ordinarily translate by “moderation,” sometimes also by “temperance,” is understood to
be here a composite of the two words [. . .] saving, preserving [. . .] sense, practical
wisdom, prudence.
Reader:
Moderationxiii does in fact preserve our belief as to our own good; for pleasure and pain
do not destroy or pervert all beliefs, for instance, the belief that the three angles of a
triangle are, or are not, together equal to two right angles, but only beliefs concerning
action. The first principles of action are the end to which our acts are means; but a man
corrupted by a love of pleasure or fear of pain, entirely fails to discern any first principle,
and cannot see that he ought to choose and do everything in the mean to this end, and for
its sake: for vice tends to destroy the sense of principle. (1140b12-21)
It therefore follows that Prudence is a truth-attaining rational quality concerned with
action in relation to the things that are good. xiv
LS: So he goes somewhat deeper into the question of the peculiarity of moral virtue or its
rational ingredient, prudence. Prudence, in contradistinction to science or art, is
threatened by low desire, for prudence consists essentially in controlling desire.
Therefore prudence is inseparable from moral virtue, namely, from the habitual control of
low desires. This kind of danger does not exist in the case of the other intellectual virtues.
And you can also make this clear in case of politics in particular, where such things like
ambition necessarily enter and destroy judgment. This cannot in the same way happen or
is at least not [an] essential danger in the arts5 [or] in science. In politics, the danger is
essential, therefore we look for the character of men in politics more than elsewhere.
Student: Is this accidental, or is there some reason for this? Aristotle gave us the
example of a man who has the virtue of practical wisdom . . . And he doesn’t give us any
examples of men who have the other virtues.
LS: Which virtues?
Student: Any of the moral virtues.
LS: He doesn’t have many other examples, that is true. But here the examples are
particularly important, the two he gives here. But I would like to postpone it until we
come to the passage.

xii

In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”
In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”
xiv
In Rackham’s translation: “good for human beings.”
xiii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

445

Reader:
Moreover, we can speak of excellence in Art, but not of excellence in Prudence. Also in
Art voluntary error is not as bad as involuntary, whereas in the sphere of Prudence it is
worse, as it is in the sphere of the virtues. It is therefore clear that Prudence is an
excellence or virtue, and not an Art.
Of the two parts of the soul possessed of reason, Prudence must be the virtue of one,
namely, the part that forms opinions.
LS: You see here [. . .] occurs; and this is where the connection with Plato comes in.
Reader:
For Opinion deals with that which can vary, and so does Prudence. But yet Prudence is
not a rational quality merely, as shown by the fact that a purely rational faculty can be
forgotten, whereas a failure in Prudence is not a mere lapse of memory.
LS: If we limit ourselves to the last point: you have learned an art, whatever that art may
be, and you may forget it. But being sensible, you cannot forget. That is Aristotle’s
assertion. We can illustrate it in our language as follows. We can forget all kinds of
things, but one thing is impossible [to forget] without losing our character completely,
and that is our duty. If we forget our duty, if we forget our conscience or whatever we
call it, that’s impossible. [Something] similar to that is what Aristotle has here in mind.
The key point: practical wisdom is not an art. And the ultimate reason for that is the
inseparable connection between practical wisdom and moral virtue. No such connection
consists between moral virtue and art.
Reader:
Scientific Knowledge is a mode of conception dealing with universals—
LS: We do not have to read this whole section. What he makes clear in the next chapter
is: he speaks of the faculty by which the highest principles as such are perceived, and this
faculty is translated by “intellect.” Let us read the next chapter, 1141a9.
Reader:
The term Wisdom is employed in the arts to denote those men who are the most perfect
masters of their art, for instance, it is applied to Pheidias as a sculptor and to Polycleitus
as a statuary. (1140b21-1141a11)
LS: You see then that Aristotle chooses the example from what we would call the fine
arts today. The fine arts are to a higher degree arts than the [. . .] arts because they are
more exact, more precise. Yes?
Reader:
In this use then Wisdom merely signifies artistic excellence. But we also think that some
people are wise in general and not in one department, and not ‘wise in something else,’ as
Homer says in the Margites:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

446

Neither a delver nor a ploughman him
The Gods have made, nor wise in ought decide.
Hence it is clear that Wisdom must be the most perfect of the modes of knowledge. The
wise man therefore must not only know the conclusions that follow from his first
principles, but also have a true conception of those principles themselves. Hence Wisdom
must be a combination of Intelligence and Scientific Knowledge: it must be a knowledge
possessing a head of the most exalted object. xv
LS: This is then the highest intellectual stage of which man is capable, called wisdom.
And this consists of intellect, the grasp of the principles, and science, the ability to
deduce from these principles, to demonstrate from these principles secondary truths.
Reader:
For it is strange to think that Political Sciencexvi is the loftiest kind of knowledge,
inasmuch as man is not the highest thing in the world.
LS: So Aristotle reminds us here of the fact that in book 10 (the end of the work), sophia,
theoretical wisdom, is the highest. And therefore politics, political knowledge, cannot
claim its place. The supremacy of politics which Aristotle rejects is the same as the
supremacy of morality. This would require that the highest known being is man. That is
implied in what he says here. Since man is not the best being in the universe, politics and
morality cannot be the highest. In a way, this conclusion that the highest known being is
man is in the teaching of Kant, because of God we do not have any theoretical
knowledge, so the highest being known to us according to Kant is man. And Kant could
say in some passages of the Critique of Pure Reason that all the philosophic questions, or
the fundamental philosophic questions point to one and the same question, and that
question is: what is man? “What is man” is the philosophic question. [But] not so for
Aristotle. This is illustrated by this Aristotelian remark here.
Reader:
And as ‘wholesome’ and ‘good’ mean one thing for men and another for fishes, whereas
‘white’ and ‘straight’ mean the same thing always, so everybody would denote the same
thing by ‘wise,’ but not by ‘prudent’; for each kind of beings will describe as prudent,
and will entrust itself to, one who can discern its own particular welfare; hence even
some of the lower animals are said to be prudent, namely those which display a
capacity for forethought as regards their own lives. (1141a11-28)
LS: And let us stop here for one moment. So prudence, practical wisdom, and morality
are essentially relative to man. The theoretical things do not have such an essential
relation to man. Aristotle gives here the examples of “white” and “straight.” Let us limit
ourselves to the example of white. What has happened to “white” in modern times? Well,
white came [to be understood in light of] the distinction between primary and secondary
xv
xvi

In Rackham’s translation: “it must be a consummated knowledge of the most exalted objects.”
In Rackham’s translation: “absurd to think that Political Science or Prudence.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

447

qualities. White colors belong of course to the secondary qualities, and they are relative
to the different living beings, in particular to man, so that the theoretical qualities proper
which have no relativity to man according to this Lockean view are only the primary
qualities.
But for Aristotle the main point here is to bring out the relativity of prudence to man.
What is true of the good of which he speaks here is also true of the noble and the just.
They are not relative to this or that individual, of course not, but to man as man. And
Aristotle brings this out by the strong statement that the other qualities would be the same
for man as for fishes, without wondering whether the fishes actually perceive these
qualities. But this was not his primary concern;xvii the primary concern was no relativity
to man. Let us continue where we left off.
Reader:
It is also clear that Wisdom cannot be the same thing as Political Science; for if we are to
call knowledge of our own interests wisdom, there will be a number of different kinds of
wisdom, one for each species: there cannot be a single such wisdom dealing with the
good of all living things, any more than there is one art of medicine for all existing
things. (1141a28-33)
LS: So in other words, if someone would say that practical wisdom is the highest, then he
would have to answer the question “Which practical wisdom, the practical wisdom for a
man, for a lion, the practical wisdom for servants?” because of this relativity. In the case
of theoretical wisdom, the question does not arise.
Student: How does this fit in with what Aristotle says sometimes about the fact that all
human beings have as their end somehow a service to man?
LS: Where does he say that?
Student: I think at one point near the beginning of the Politics.
LS: In other words, you mean that in the light of this hierarchic order of all subhuman
beings, the difficulty would disappear. But what about this relativity, this hierarchy: “all
beings on earth in the service of man”? It makes sense for the domestic animals and a few
other things, but what about the many other animals which are dysfunctional from this
point of view? There is only one way out of this difficulty, and this is to say that all
animals are for the sake of man, but not necessarily for his practical use but also for the
use as possible objects of his understanding, i.e., of his wisdom, theoretical wisdom,
which is not merely human because it does not have this concern with the specifically
human.
Student: What about the remark of Aristotle that the soul is in a way all things?
Wouldn’t that mean that man is in a way [. . .]
xvii

Between “not” and “his” in this sentence the transcript has a set of dashes.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

448

LS: Yes, that is, you assume rightly that when he speaks of the soul there, he means the
human soul. But if there are quite a few things which are lower—man is a microcosm,
you can 6[put it like] that. This means also that the soul is in a way the inanimate thing;
the inanimate things and the vegetative world, which are lower than the human soul. Now
if there is a being possible which has only the intellect and not all things, would this not
be a higher being than man? That would be God.
Student: Or angels.
LS: Or angels. But in Aristotle there are no angels. You could say the stars are gods.
Now will you go on?
Reader:
It may be argued that man is superior to the other animals, but this makes no difference:
since there exist other things far more divine in their nature than man, for instance, to
mention the things most visible, the things of which the cosmosxviii is composed.
LS: He means the stars, and the stars understood as living beings, for the very respectable
reason that when we look up we see here moved things, things which are not obviously
pushed or pulled but moving from their own inner impulse: living beings. Living beings,
and therefore of much finer substance than any living being here on earth, and with a
certain disregard of [a] difficulty [of] which we are but too aware: gods. And this was a
question discussed later on, partly on the basis of Aristotle himself, whether these
heavenly bodies do not also possess, or are not related to intellects guiding them. This
would then be an Aristotelian substitute for the Greek hunters.
Reader:
These considerations therefore show that Wisdom is Scientific Knowledge and Intuitive
Intelligence as regards the things of the most exalted nature. This is why people say that
men like Anaxagoras and Thales ‘may be wise but are not prudent,’ when they see them
display ignorance of their own interests; and while admitting them to possess a
knowledge that is rare, marvelous, difficult, and even superhuman, they yet declare this
knowledge to be useless, because these sages do not seek to know the things that are
good for human beings. (1141a33-b8)
LS: These are the opposite points, Pericles and Thales. Thales looked at the stars and fell
into a ditch, so he was wholly unable to take care of his own affairs and [was] from this
perspective a ridiculous individual, yet from Aristotle’s point of view higher than
Pericles.
Student: But if he discovered water when he fell into the ditch?
LS: No, but he showed to his countrymen that he could take care of himself if he wanted.
This speculation regarding the all-present—do you mean that? But we must not forget
xviii

In Rackham’s translation: “celestial system.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

449

that this indifference to the human things is always beyond phronēsis and means always
beyond morality. In b14.
Reader:
Nor is Prudence a knowledge of general principles only: it must also take account of
particular facts, since it is concerned with action, and deals with particular things.
LS: Now this is a somewhat strange remark, because we have been sufficiently trained
by Aristotle to take this for granted, that practical wisdom will have to do primarily with
particular cases and not with generalities. For example, is this conduct here proper
conduct? That is the question to be decided by practical wisdom. But what is an example
of a generality supplied by practical wisdom? Some practically important things are of a
general or universal character as distinguished from the particular one, what to do here
now.
Student: [. . .]
LS: It could be, but it would not be a good Aristotelian example. It would not be good
because it is subject to some qualifications; for example, in war it is all right to steal.
Another Student: One should have a good upbringing. I mean, that would seem to be
practical wisdom for parents.
LS: Yes. One can say that. But does this give us sufficient indication? What does
“properly” mean here?
Student: The philosophic way of life is the best way of life.
LS: Yes, well, that goes beyond everything. But a more simple one—for example, we
read in book 1 a brief discussion of wealth and honor as the highest objectives of life. To
realize that this is not the case is surely not a matter of theoretical wisdom but of practical
wisdom, and yet not of the practical wisdom concerned with the question of here and now
but with the whole of life. Now let us turn to the next chapter, which is of very great
importance to us, b22.
Reader:
Prudence is indeed the same quality of mind as Political Science. (1141b14-23)
LS: [The Greek for] “political science” is hard to translate—“political ability,” the
“political art.” [It is] in Greek an adjective without a noun. The only guide you have is
that the noun must be in the same gender as the adjective, but both epistēmē and [. . .] and
[. . .] are as feminine as politeia. There you have a choice. Begin again, please.
Reader:

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 23

450

Prudence is indeed the same quality of mind as Political Science, though their essence is
different. Of Prudence, as regards the city, xix one kind, as supreme and directive, is called
Legislative Science; the other, as dealing with particular occurrences, has the name,
Political Science, that really belongs to both kinds. The latter is concerned with action
and deliberation (for a vote of enactmentxx is a thing to be done, being the last step in the
deliberative process), and this is why it is only those persons who deal with particular
facts who are spoken of as ‘taking part in politics,’ because it is only those persons who
perform actions, like the workmen in an industry. (1141b23-29)
LS: In other words, we do not say of the legislators that they are engaged in politics,
because they are concerned with framing a code for all time, so to speak, and they are not
engaged in here and now decisions. Our notion of legislator is misleading, then. Yes?—
xxi

1

Deleted “the distinction.”
Deleted “of.”
3
Deleted “done.”
4
Deleted “LS: Now wait a moment. Yes, I’m sorry. Go on.”
5
Deleted “and also.”
6
Deleted “state it with.”
2

xix

In Rackham’s translation: “state.”
In Rackham’s translation: “parliamentary enactment.”
xxi
The tape was changed at this point. Either the remainder of the session was not transcribed or
the transcript of it did not survive.
xx

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

451

Session 25: May 30, 1968
Leo Strauss:i Now let us turn to our subject. I repeat to you the main points made by Aristotle in
the Nicomachean Ethics hitherto. There is one and only one highest good, which Aristotle calls
happiness, and the core of it is virtue. So this is one side of the matter. The other side is that
happiness, although its core is virtue,1 is of a higher rank than virtue. Happiness is something
worthy of reverence, whereas virtue is something worthy of praise.
Now at any rate, given the close connection between happiness and virtue, it becomes necessary
to find out what virtue is. And the answer given is that virtue as well as its opposite are habits of
preferring or choosing, “hexeis proairetikai.” And therefore this key question is now: what is
choosing, choice, election? Election proves to be a kind of the voluntary or spontaneous, namely,
that kind that is preceded by deliberation. Again, deliberation is a kind of inquiry, namely, that
kind that deals with what we or I can do here and now and with things regarding which exact
foresight is not possible. And from this it follows that there is no deliberation regarding letters or
shoemaking, but there is deliberation regarding seafaring as well as medicine, up to the present
day: the consilium of physicians. Deliberation always presupposes an end which is no longer
subject to deliberation. Generals do not deliberate as to whether they want to win the battle; they
deliberate on how they may win the battle. Deliberation ultimately presupposes natural ends:
ends imposed on man by his nature, and ends which are in no sense subject to deliberation. And
these ends can be taken together under the heading happiness. No man deliberates as to whether
he wishes to be happy; that he wishes anyway. He deliberates as to the ways and means toward
happiness.
So Aristotle says accordingly that choice has to do with what leads to the end, whereas wishing,
boulēsis, is concerned with the end itself. This implies, and that is for Aristotle in a way the most
important point, this implication: choice has to do with what is within our power. Whether we
desire happiness or not is not within our power; we desire it naturally. But whether we seek our
happiness along this way or along that way, that depends on our decision, and for that we are
responsible. And that is the point which Aristotle makes: we are responsible for our action and
therefore also for our virtues and vices, because our virtues and the vices are the outcomes of
previous actions. And he criticizes here the view that all vice is due to ignorance, as Socrates
seems to have said, for if all vice is due to ignorance, it would not be voluntary, but vice is
voluntary. Because if vice were not voluntary, virtue would not be voluntary, and the same
people who are perfectly willing to shift the responsibility for their vices to their environments
are very unwilling to shift the responsibility for their virtues to their environment.
Now the voluntariness of vice does not mean that a man intends primarily and per se to be
vicious, but rather in the following manner. And this is the way in which Thomas Aquinas
explains it: if someone wishes to take a walk in the heat of summer knowing that he would
perspire, the consequence is that he wishes to perspire.ii So the vicious man does not “wish” to be
vicious; he only wishes to have, say, money or power. But he knows that he cannot get the power
and the money in [the] easy way, or seemingly easy way in which he wants to get it, except by
i
ii

Strauss begins the session with a discussion about the exam and due date for papers.
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics, §512.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

452

committing crimes. But therefore he is fully responsible for the crimes, just as a man who is
perspiring in July, in the midday noon heat of July, is fully responsible for his perspiring. No one
wishes to be sick, but many men wish to eat in a manner leading to sickness. They are
responsible for their sickness: they wish to be sick, not primo et per se, primarily and by itself,
but implicitly. To some extent there exists even responsibility for bodily defects. If, say,
someone becomes obese because he does not take bodily exercises, then he is responsible for his
being obese and he can be blamed for being obese. In the case of mere sickness, it’s of course
different.
Aristotle rejects the view that virtue or vice are not chosen but imposed on man by nature.
According to this view, everything depends on being well-born. If you are well-born, you will be
virtuous; if you are ill-born, you will be vicious and nothing can be done about it. Aristotle
rejects this view as incompatible with our ordinary understanding of such matters. Now let us
turn, Mr. Pangle, to 1114b25 or 26. That is the end of this discussion. Let us read it.
Reader:
We have then now discussed in outline the virtues in general, having indicated their
genus [namely, that it is a mean, and a habit]iii, and having shown that they render us apt
to do the same actions as those by which they are produced, and to do them in the way in
which right reason may enjoin; and that they depend on ourselves and are voluntary.
But our habitsiv are not voluntary in the same way as are our actions. Our actions we can
control from beginning to end, and we are conscious of them at each stage. But our
habits,v on the other hand, though we can control their beginnings, each separate addition
to them is imperceptible, as is the case with the growth of a disease; though they are
voluntary in that we were free to employ our capacities in the one way or the other.
LS: Now what Aristotle has in mind: if you have acquired the habit of drinking too much, then
the mere resolve to become sober will not be very helpful because the habit is ingrained by now.
And yet you are responsible for that bad habit, because you acquired it at a time when you still
were not yet habituated: you chose the whisky bottle in preference to a wiser course of life.
Good. Now this is the conclusion of this first section of book 3, and then Aristotle turns to a new
subject, and we may read first the beginning. Yes?
Reader:
But to resume, let us now discuss the virtues severally, saying what they are, the class of objects
to which they are related, and how they are related to them. vi In so doing, we shall also make it
clear how many virtues there are. (1114b26-1115a5)
LS: Now let us stop here. So Aristotle has spoken in general about the virtues and this was, as he
called it, an outline of what virtue is. But an outline is, as such, incomplete. The completion will
iii

In Rackham’s translation: “disposition.” Brackets are Rackham’s.
In Rackham’s translation: “dispositions.”
v
In Rackham’s translation: “With our dispositions.”
vi
In Rackham’s translation: “let us now discuss the virtues severally, defining the nature of each, the class
of objects to which it is related, and the way in which it is related to them.”
iv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

453

be supplied by the discussion of the various particular virtues of which he will speak in the rest
of book 3, book 4, and book 5. And then he says: by this discussion of the particular virtues, we
will find out how many2 particular virtues there are. Aristotle does not give a deduction of the
virtues from a single unitary principle; say, he does not try to show [that] since virtues are the
mean and they are habits, there must therefore be these and these and only these and these
virtues. He proceeds in the directly opposite manner in the Politics, when he speaks of the
various regimes. There he makes a general scheme of what kind of regime there can be, and from
this it follows that there can be only six and these and these six regimes, namely, rule of one, rule
of a few, and rule of the many, and in each case either good or bad. So you get six. There is no
equivalent to that in the Ethics, and therefore what Aristotle does here is simply to look around
and see what kinds of virtues we find, and then after we have exhausted the whole sphere, then
we know how many virtues there are, if none is missing. And of course that leads to all kinds of
difficulties. To mention only the most striking point: piety is not a virtue mentioned here, which
implies piety is not according to Aristotle a virtue. And he does not give us any reasons here; we
have to figure that out by ourselves (which is a good subject for a paper, incidentally). But one
would have to have read the Politics also to answer this question. And I do not know how we are
in this respect.
Aristotle at any rate begins now the discussion of the particular virtues with courage or
manliness, andreia. Why does he begin with andreia? He doesn’t tell us, so we have to find out.
We get some help in this enterprise by Plato: in the first book of the Laws, Plato gives an order
of the virtues according to rank, beginning also with courage and leading up to wisdom.vii So in a
general way [he does] the same thing which Aristotle does in the Ethics, and this first book of the
Laws would be of some use for answering the question. But of course one has to study above all
the Aristotelian text. Now let us read a few passages from the discussion of courage. 1115a24.
Reader:
What then are the fearful things in respect of which Courage is displayed?
LS: Aristotle has shown that courage has to do with the right posture towards fears, but not all
fears are relevant here. If someone fears ignominy, then he is not a coward on this score. And so
Aristotle is from now on trying to give a positive answer. Yes, read again the sentence which you
just read.
Reader:
What then are the fearful things in respect of which Courage is displayed? I suppose those which
are the greatest, since there is no one more brave in enduring danger than the courageous man.
Now the most terrible thing of all is death; for it is the end, and when a man is dead, nothing, we
think, either good or evil can befall him any more. But even death, we can hold, viii does not in all
circumstances give an opportunity for Courage: for instance, we do not call a man courageous
for facing death by drowning or disease. What form of death then is a test of Courage?
Presumably that which is the noblest. (1115a24-30)

vii
viii

See Plato, Laws 631c-d.
In Rackham’s translation: “should hold.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

454

LS: Yes, in Greek that is in the form of a question. “In which things then, or not rather in the
most noble things?” Question mark. Yes?
Reader:
Now the noblest form of death is death in battle, for it is encountered in the midst of the greatest
and most noble of dangers. And this conclusion is borne out by the principle on which public
honours are bestowed in cities and under monarchies. (1115a30-32)
LS: Yes. Now Aristotle uses here more than once in this whole discussion the word dokei which
we may translate: “it is thought to be.” So Aristotle follows then what is generally thought to be
the case. And following this line he says, “The brave man, the locus of the brave man’s bravery,
is war, battle, and not the sickbed, nor drowning nor the explorer on [the] Himalaya or
whatever.” This is not the highest kind of courage. The highest kind of courage is that on the
battlefield.
And now Averroes in his commentary explains Aristotle’s thought as follows, making a point
somewhat clearer perhaps than it is in Aristotle himself: men have come to agree in this, that
they exalt and magnify to the highest degree him who sustains death in war. There is a universal
agreement among men, at least among all men competent to judge in this matter, that the brave
man par excellence is a warrior, just as in the Red Indians the braves are of course not the men
who are brave on the sickbed but the warriors. And the same is true not only of such “quote
primitive” peoples but is also true of such highly civilized peoples as the Greeks. And one can
draw the general conclusion from this point that the principles of morality are always generally
accepted views (in Greek, endoxa), whereas if you look only at the posture of the soul, there is
no reason why one should say the warrior is brave whereas the explorer, or even the man on the
sickbed, is not brave. And that is Plato’s argument [for] why he extends the sphere of courage so
that it covers the whole ground, all fears and even all pleasures, and so the distinction between
courage and moderation disappears. But Aristotle tries to remain loyal and faithful to the
phenomena, and the phenomena are the judgments as they are made in the cities, especially by
the most authoritative men in these cities; let’s say the public orators. On funeral orations and
other solemn occasions [they] would always take this view. Good. Let us then turn to 1115b17.
“Now the man who sustains and fears what one ought.”
Reader:
The courageous man then is he who endures or fears the right things and for the right purpose
and in the right manner and at the right time, and who shows confidence in a similar way. (For
the courageous man feels and acts as the circumstances merit, and as principle may dictate. And
every activity aims at the end that corresponds to the disposition of which it is the manifestation.
So it is therefore with the activity of the courageous man: his courage is noble; therefore its end
is nobility, for a thing is defined by its end; therefore the courageous man endures the terrors and
bears the deeds that manifest courage, for the sake of that which is noble.) (1115b17-24)
LS: Yes, let us stop here. Now what is then the “circumstances,” as we would say, using a word
that is not Aristotelian but which corresponds perfectly to what Aristotle means? It depends on
the circumstances. For example, in some cases, to run away may be a virtuous act: think of the
case of Joseph and the wife of Potiphar. In other cases, of course it all depends on the

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

455

circumstances. Now one of the most important considerations is the end. What is the end of the
courageous man? What does Aristotle say here? So someone, in other words, may not run away,
but the end which he has in mind is [that] he doesn’t wish to be shot in the back by military
police. That is not a courageous man; that is a prudent man in the vulgar sense of prudence.
[Laughter] But the courageous man is the man who does it for—what is the end of the
courageous man, as Aristotle says here? What is the end?
Student: Nobility.
LS: Yes, the intrinsic nobility. Because it is noble to expose one’s life in this situation, therefore
and for no other reason does he do it. But this end is important also for the following
consideration: because in order to determine how to act here and now and act well here and now,
he has to look at the end, the end being the noble. And via the noble he is then able to say: under
these circumstances here it is proper to run away, whereas under those circumstances there it is
proper to stay.
Now there seems to be some manifest insufficiency, inadequacy about this statement. One has to
consider whether one has been commanded to hold a position at all costs; and then you must not
run away. Or you have been commanded to retire after having delayed the enemy’s advance;
then you may retire after this has been achieved. Now if we look at these considerations—should
this hill be held at all costs, or should it be abandoned after a certain time?—if we look into these
deliberations or considerations, we see that they will be tactical and strategic considerations,
which are in themselves not moral. I mean, this doesn’t mean that they are immoral, but they are
amoral. Now these tactical and strategic considerations in their turn are subject to a broader
consideration which we call the political consideration: is it wise to continue that war at all? And
then from this, consequences of a strategic and tactical nature will follow as a matter of course.
The individual fighter has to obey, and within very narrow limits he nevertheless must make his
own decisions. But the end in both cases—whether he simply obeys or whether he makes an
independent decision, the end is in both cases what, if we look at the concrete situation as I tried
to sketch it? At what does he ultimately look, the brave man, in order to decide whether to stay
or to run away?
Mr. Shulsky: It would seem that he would look more towards victory than towards the noble as
such.
LS: Yes, but behind the victory there is a broader consideration, because some victories are
Pyrrhic and therefore not what you would choose. The salvation of the city: that would seem to
be the end. Now Aristotle is absolutely silent about that in his analysis of bravery. The only end
which he mentions is the noble as noble. One could raise the question: but if the salvation of the
city is the highest consideration, is then there room left for bravery as a moral virtue? The
statesman, and beneath him the generals and the lower officers, determine what is to be done on
this particular hill on that particular day. Where does moral virtue come in? They determine what
is the right thing to do, and where does moral virtue come in? Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

456

Mr. Shulsky: Well, that seems to make courage sound more like a form of justice, simply
carrying out orders or generally speaking obeying the law, rather than [doing] anything
specific—
LS: Well, I will give you an example suggested by Plato in the first or second book of the Laws.
He discusses here something very different from the battlefield, namely, the symposia—in the
Greek sense, not in the present American sense. And in the symposium there must be a leader, a
ruler of the symposium, lest the people get out of hand, and in this connection Plato mentions the
following example. A man may possess the art of the pilot and yet not be able properly to
exercise it, although he has a perfect command of that art, because he gets seasick.ix So there are
two ingredients needed: he must have the knowledge of the art, and he must have the submission
of his intestines to reason, which is freedom from seasickness. Now the fighting man must know,
in a manner, the art of war—I mean “in a manner” because it is different in the case of a general
and the private. And he must not suffer cold feet, that is the other point, and both come somehow
together. But the key point which is so important is that Aristotle does not mention the salvation
of the city explicitly as the end, the kalon, the noble with which the brave man is concerned. Let
us read a few more passages, 1116a10. “As has been said.”
Reader:
As has been said then, Courage is the observance of the mean in relation to things that inspire
confidence or fear, in the circumstances stated; and it is confident and endures because it is noble
to do so or base not to do so. But to seek death in order to escape from poverty, or the pangs of
love, or from pain or sorrow, is not the act of a courageous man, but rather of a coward—
(1116a10-14)
LS: Yes, and he gives the reasons. So to choose death in order to avoid poverty or eros and pain
is not courage but cowardice. And the reason is given in the sequel: it is softness to avoid the
toilsome things, and the brave man is not soft. And secondly, the man who commits suicide for
the sake of eros, for example: he does not do it for the sake of the noble, but in order to escape
from an evil, and therefore he is a coward. Now in the immediate sequel, Aristotle discusses five
kinds of pseudo-courage. There is no such discussion of pseudo-forms in the case of the other
virtues. Courage seems to be a particularly ambiguous thing, because he develops these five
forms. And the form mentioned in the first place is that of the citizen’s courage; in other words,
the ordinary citizen. And he fights of course for the city, but this is not the case of the truly
courageous man, of whom Aristotle has spoken before. Let us perhaps read this section on the
political courage.
Reader:
First, as most closely resembling true Courage, comes the citizen’s courage. Citizen troops
appear to endure dangers because of the legal penalties and the reproach attaching to cowardice,
and the honours awarded to bravery; hence those races appear to be the bravest among which
cowards are degraded and brave men held in honour. It is this citizen courage which inspires the
heroes portrayed by Homer, like Diomede and Hector:

ix Plato, Laws 639b.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

457

Polydamas will be the first to flout me;
and Diomedes says
Hector will make his boast at Troy hereafter:
“By me was Tydeus’ son . . . ”
This type of courage most closely resembles the one described before, because it is prompted by
a virtue, namely the sense of shame, and by the desire for something noble, namely honour, and
the wish to avoid the disgrace of being reproached.
The courage of troops forced into battle by their officers may be classed as of the same type,
though they are inferior inasmuch as their motive is not a sense of shame but fear, and the desire
to avoid not disgrace but pain. Their masters compel them to be brave, after Hector’s fashion:
Let me see any skulking off the field—
he shall not save his carcass from the dogs!
The same is done by commanders who draw up their troops in front of them and beat them if
they give ground, or who form them in line with a trench or some other obstacle in the rear; all
these are using compulsion. A man ought not to be brave because he is compelled to be, but
because courage is noble. (1116a17-b3)
LS: Yes, that is all. So you see even here, when he speaks of the citizen-soldier, either the more
noble or the less noble kind, he does not speak of the end of this human activity, namely, the
salvation of the city. That’s very strange. There is a famous verse of Horace, “Dulce et decorum
est pro patria mori”: “it is sweet and decorous to die for the fatherland.”x Now “sweet,” that is a
special point, as Aristotle will make clear. But decorous, that is of course that with which
Aristotle is very much concerned, but Aristotle doesn’t say a thing about the polis. And of course
the polis is implied, you can say, in war, because who wages war except cities or political
communities? But still it is very strange. And in this connection I think it is worth mentioning
that later on, in the section on friendship, Aristotle uses once or twice the word “fatherland,”
which to the best of my knowledge doesn’t occur ever in the Politics. And I don’t believe one
can explain that by saying Aristotle was a stranger; you know, he came from northern Greece
and he was throughout his life a stranger, and therefore he did not have the patriotic feelings
proper. This would be too simple and psychological aberration, this kind of explanation. Mr.
Zinman?
Mr. Zinman: Why does he call shame a virtue here when in the list of virtues [it’s not]?
LS: I beg your pardon?
Mr. Zinman: Why does he call shame a virtue here when in the list of virtues in book 4 it’s [not
a virtue]? Is that connected with the ambiguity—
x

Horace, Odes 3.2.13.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

458

LS: Yes, that is loose language here. Speaking of a lower version of courage, he lowers his
sights in order to account for it. That is not strict language. In strict language, the sense of shame
is not a virtue, as he will make clear at the end of book 4. There is one explanation which I
would like to suggest for why Aristotle does not speak here of the polis, namely (and I think
someone mentioned this before, some one of you), if the emphasis in the understanding of
bravery is on the salvation of the city, on the common good, then we speak in fact of justice and
not of courage. Did not some one of you make this suggestion? Mr. Shulsky. And I did not
properly recognize it? I do it herewith. Yes?
Student: Could I go back to the first passages?
LS: Sure.
Same Student: If there are two men with the same ends, approximately, and both as noble as
each other, and one is put in circumstances to die bravely and one ends his life because of other
circumstances where he wasn’t put in a position to die bravely, does that mean that one is more
brave than the other?
LS: Well, the man who commits suicide in order to escape poverty is not a brave man. I mean,
he faces death, but he faces death in the wrong set of circumstances and for the wrong reason,
and therefore he is not courageous.
Same Student: Suppose he’s shot in the back unawares, whereas one person—
LS: Well, then it’s not an action of his; he simply suffers some misfortune. He’s not responsible
for that in any way. I mean, how can it be a courageous action to be killed if you only suffer the
killing and do not have the possibility of taking a stand towards imminent death? So then let us
consider a few more passages. 1117a29. That is still about—the last chapter on courage. Yes?
Reader:
Courage is displayed with respect to confidence and fear, but not with respect to both equally: it
is more particularly displayed in regard to objects of fear; for one who is unperturbed in the
presence of terrors and comports himself rightly towards these is courageous in a fuller sense
than one who does so in situations that inspire confidence. In fact, as has been said, men are
sometimes called courageous for enduring pain. Hence Courage itself is attended by pain; and it
is justly praised, because it is harder to endure pain than to abstain from pleasure. Not but what it
would appear that the end corresponding to the virtue of Courage is really pleasant, only its
pleasantness is obscured by the attendant circumstances. This is illustrated by the case of athletic
contests: to boxers, for example, their end—the object they box for, the wreath and the honours
of victory—is pleasant, but the blows they receive must hurt them, being men of flesh and blood,
and also all the labour they undergo is painful; and these painful incidentals are so numerous that
the final object, being a small thing, appears not to contain any pleasure at all. If then the same is
true of Courage, the death or wounds that it may bring will be painful to the courageous man,
and he will suffer them unwillingly; but he will endure them because it is noble to do so, or
because it is base not to do so. And the more a man possesses all virtue, and the more happy he
is, the more pain will death cause him; for to such a man life is worth most, and he stands to lose

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

459

the greatest goods, and knows that this is so, and this must be painful. But he is none the less
courageous on that account, perhaps indeed he is more so, because he prefers the noblexi in war
to the greatest prizes of life.
It is not true therefore of every virtue that its active exercise is essentially pleasant, save in so far
as it attains its end.
No doubt it is possible that such men as these do not make the best professional soldiers, but men
who are less courageous, and have nothing of value besides life to lose; for these face danger
readily, and will barter their lives for trifling gains.
LS: Ya. So this is another point which has to be considered if we try to understand why Aristotle
begins his discussion of the particular virtues with courage. The act of courage, exposing one’s
life on the battlefield, is not unqualifiedly pleasant, whereas in the case of the other virtues, the
acts of virtue are intrinsically and unambiguously pleasant. Even to deny oneself some lower
pleasures gives rise to a higher kind of pleasure. There is a pleasure deriving from the fact that
one is the master of oneself, of one’s desire. So at any rate, more formally stated, the case of
andreia, of courage, is altogether a case apart. One can say that courage is one pole, and at the
other pole there is wisdom and the other virtues. And you could perhaps look [this] up in Plato’s
Laws 963e, and to some extent even in the Protagoras: this uniqueness of courage is emphasized
by Protagoras. To some extent this is accepted by Aristotle as well, as we have seen. Now let us
follow Aristotle’s argument then first to see what the principle underlying his ordering of the
various virtues is. In 1117b, a little bit at the beginning of the next paragraph, the one which you
just read.
Reader:
Let this suffice as an account of Courage: from what has been said it will not be difficult to form
at all events a rough conception of its nature.
After Courage, let us speak of moderation;xii for these appear to be the virtues of the irrational
parts of the soul. (1117a29-b24)
LS: So you see, he means moderation and courage. Aristotle deals first with the virtues of the
irrational parts, of desires and aversions, of the mere desires and aversions. And here within
these two he assigns the first place to courage because of the lower rank of courage compared
with the other virtues. Later on he will call the object of these two virtues the “bodily pleasures
and pains.” So that is clearly then an ascent from the bodily to the less bodily, culminating in
book 10 when Aristotle speaks of the contemplative life. This ascent character of the argument
must be considered if one wants to understand the details. A little bit later, 1118a23.
“Moderation and its opposite deals with suchlike pleasures.” Do you have that?
Reader:

xi
xii

In Rackham’s translation: “he prefers glory.”
In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

460

Moderation and its oppositexiii are therefore concerned with those pleasures which man shares
with the lower animals, and which consequently appear slavish and bestial. (1118a23-25)
LS: So in other words, there is something beastly about these desires which are ordered by the
virtues of courage and moderation, and that again reveals their lower rank. If we take, for
example, the virtues and vices regarding wealth (of which Aristotle will speak shortly thereafter),
the very desire for wealth is not bestial, because beasts have no sense of wealth, whereas a desire
for food, drink and so on, this we share with the brutes and this is lower.
Student: Is there a significant difference between the kind of temperance he talks about in book
2 and this sort of temperance which is kind of prudent abstinence?
LS: It is more than prudent abstinence; other things have to be considered. For example, I mean,
not only that you must not eat more than is suitable for you—that would be medical advice, not
to eat too much nor eat things which would do harm to your health—but [also], for example,
such things as how quick and what kind of quantities at a time you take. This is not necessarily
medical anymore, but it has to do with the beautiful, with the noble. Let us turn to another
passage where we can perhaps clear this up more fully. 1119a11. “The moderate man.” Yes?
Reader:
The moderatexiv man keeps a middle course in these matters. He takes no pleasure at all in the
things that the profligate enjoys most, on the contrary, he positively dislikes them; nor in general
does he find pleasure in wrong things, nor excessive pleasure in anything of this sort; nor does he
feel pain or desire when they are lacking, or only in a moderate degree, not more than is right,
nor at the wrong time.xv But such pleasures as conduce to health and fitness he will try to obtain
in a moderate and right degree; as also other pleasures so far as they are not detrimental to health
and fitness, and not ignoble, nor beyond his means. The man who exceeds these limits cares
more for such pleasures than they are worth. Not so the moderate man; he only cares for them as
right principle enjoins. (1119a11-20)
LS: We have seen when we considered the section on courage [that] there was no sufficiently
clear statement as to the end pursued by the courageous man. It was said that the locus of
courage is the field of battle, but it was not said that the end which the brave man has in mind is
the salvation of the city. Now here he speaks of moderation and has something to say about the
end, the end being here such things as health and a good condition of the body. And one could
rightly say this is not the virtue of moderation, because that is what any physician would
prescribe, and the physician is not a moral teacher of man. But Aristotle mentions here also
another point. He says one must do it in the right manner and [do] nothing against the noble or
beyond what one can afford. The latter is obviously beyond the province of the physician. You
have to know whether you can invest an extraordinary part of your income or money in food and
drink; the doctor is not in a position to do that. But still, this also one of the outer worlds of
moderation and not the core.

xiii

In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance and Profligacy.”
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xv
In Rackham’s translation: “wrong time, et cetera.”
xiv

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

461

But there is also the noble here involved. Where does the noble come in? The noble we can say
stands for the nonutilitarian. The others are all utilitarian considerations: what food is conducive
to my health and the good condition of my body, and what amount of money I can spend for
food without lacking it for more urgent purposes, and so on. Now what is the kalon, the noble
here, the nonutilitarian? Well, quite externally, for example, not eating too hastily, nor too slowly
or daintily, because that is in a way as grave a defect as the opposite. In other words, one must
not behave like a slave of one’s desire or a slave to the apparent freedom from desire—that’s the
case of the man who is too dainty. More generally stated, all these virtues have to do, if not
always visibly, with human living together. Human living together would be impossible if one
were not concerned with the decent opinion of others; otherwise you have the mere gutter. And
that this is out of the question for Aristotle is of course implied when he speaks of the noble. One
must not compel anyone to be an unwilling participant in one’s digestive processes. This has
nothing to do with utilitarianism proper, but has very much to do with the noble as far as this
particular virtue is concerned. Let us turn to another passage, 1119b15 to 18. That is the end of
this book.
Reader:
The aim of both moderation—xvi
LS: No, before.
Reader:
Hence in the moderatexvii man the appetitive element must be in harmony with reason.xviii For the
aim of both moderation and reasonxix is that which is noble; and the moderatexx man desires the
right thing in the right way at the right time, which is what reason xxi ordains.
Let this then be our account of moderation. xxii (1119b15-18)
LS: Yes. What does this mean? The desiring faculty of the moderate man must be in harmony
with the logos, for both the desiring faculty of the moderate man and the logos have the same
end, namely, the noble. The logos, reason, aims at the noble. That’s a very provisional statement.
Now on the other hand, the desire of the well-bred man—in this particular case, of the moderate
man—is also the noble, and this harmony makes him a truly good man. The noble is what is
proper in the circumstances. That is exactly what is determined by the logos. For example, there
are situations in which it is perfectly proper to eat hastily: especially in war, but also if there is a
fire, the house is on fire, and that may be the last opportunity to have something to eat. No one
would be regarded as acting improperly if in such a situation he would gulp down his food.
Good. Now this—Mr. Simpson?

xvi

In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xviii
In Rackham’s translation: “principle.”
xix
In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance and principle.”
xx
In Rackham’s translation: “temperate.”
xxi
In Rackham’s translation: “principle.”
xxii
In Rackham’s translation: “Temperance.”
xvii

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

462

Student: The subject of courage and moderation: it would seem that perhaps he does an injustice
to the phenomenon, and you said that Aristotle always does justice to the phenomena.
LS: Yes. Well, that is his earnest desire; and if we find him napping we have to say it, if with the
necessary politeness and excuses.
Student: No, I find him doing justice in this case, but I’m wondering whether justice means
completeness, and I don’t think it does in this case. I mean, it seems that it would be possible and
perhaps correct to speak of, say, the courage and moderation of the philosopher, and that would
seem to have absolutely no place—
LS: Ya. That is true, but that also however is precisely a proof of Aristotle’s sobriety and
faithfulness to the phenomena, because when we speak of intellectual courage or of intellectual
moderation, then we use the words courage and moderation metaphorically. What we think
primarily of when we speak of courage is what is now called physical courage and not moral
courage. And similarly, when we speak of moderation or temperance, we mean primarily the
self-control regarding the sensual desires and do not mean, say, moderation regarding music.
Aristotle mentions this example when he speaks of moderation: a man who is moderate in
listening to music is not what we mean ordinarily by a temperate man. The mere fact that it is
possible meaningfully to extend these terms shows that it is not entirely unfounded, but it is not
the primary phenomenon. So I would say this criticism of Aristotle, I believe, is unjustified. But
it would be a very interesting question: since when did people begin to speak of intellectual
courage? First of all, what does it mean, for example, if someone exposes himself to torture or
other unpleasantness because he holds certain opinions not approved of by the community? Has
this something to do with courage? Formerly, people made a distinction between thinking and
saying. And saying, that depends on whether under certain circumstances the community doesn’t
have the right to forbid certain . . . Think of Thrasymachus in the first book of the Republic, who
forbids Socrates to give certain answers, in this way only imitating what the polis does or did in
olden times. So the question would then be [about] the courage to face certain verities which are
hard to bear. This is what we think of today, I believe, by intellectual courage—I mean,
regardless of the external consequences, even if one never says a word about it in public. Does
this exist for people like Plato and Aristotle? It’s a difficult question. But did you ever come
across a passage which clearly shows that this fear of facing an unpleasant truth is overcome by a
man and who is praised on that account for his courage?
Student: I know that Xenophon . . . Socrates . . .
LS: Yes, but that would only mean that Xenophon understands courage in the strict sense: that
they didn’t regard Socrates as an outstanding soldier in the way in which the tranquil Alcibiades
regarded him as an outstanding soldier. It doesn’t have to mean more. I think it has to do with a
much broader question: whether the truth was ever considered by the classical philosophers as
something terrible and not fundamentally pleasing.
Student: What about that little anecdote, well, the story about Hippodamus—I don’t know if I’m
pronouncing it correctly—Hippodamus in Aristotle, the designer of towns who was a little like a
hippie.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

463

LS: Yes, and was a very conspicuous fellow in many respects, and a funny fellow. And the first
political scientist in existence, according to Aristotle’s view of what political science is. I always
found that this was a fact of some usefulness for the present-day political scientist who
overestimates the importance of his pursuit, that the founder of the science was such a rather
ridiculous individual. But what did Hippodamus have to do with unpleasant or terrible truth?
Same Student: Well, it seems as if—well, as I understand it, Hippodamus at least was onto a
truth that he successfully . . . The idea is that here is a man who is presenting something that’s
unpopular to the Athenian polis. He isn’t persecuted for it, but they laugh at his dress and so
forth. He goes on and presents it anyway.
LS: Yes, but this doesn’t mean that the truth which he has discovered is unpleasant or hard to
bear. Mr. Fairbanks?
Student: What about the case of, say, Lucretius? I mean, doesn’t it seem at the beginning that
the truth he reveals is probably frightening?
LS: Yes, Lucretius is the only exception which I happen to know. There may be others, I mean,
where the poet, the Epicurean poet, is satisfied that the truth which he reveals is quite terrible and
hard to bear, and yet it must be borne. But I think Lucretius is the exception rather than the rule.
Oedipus, yes, that is something; that is true. But Oedipus: if you understand this to mean that
there is a necessary connection between his solving the riddle of the Sphinx and his killing his
father and mating with his mother, if this is a proper interpretation of the myth, then it is true.
There are truths the discovery of which is necessarily accompanied by horrible crime. But the
question is: is this a proper interpretation of the myth? I do not know. Yes?
Student: How about the case of Cephalus in the Republic, when Socrates breaks through his
argument with the insane man with the weapon, and he finds something to do in the backyard
immediately? Isn’t the truth in a sense terrible to him?
LS: Yes, but do you remember the scene? In what posture does he leave the room? What does he
do?
Student: He . . . the argument . . .
LS: Yes, and what does he do while he gives the argument to his heir?
Student: He laughs.
LS: He laughs! So that is not the way in which a man who is stricken by a terrible truth would
act. At any rate, that is what we take for granted in the nineteenth and twentieth century. It
began, I think, in the nineteenth century, terrible truth. The man who gave the strongest
expression to this view I think was Nietzsche: terrible truth, and yet undeniable truth. And this
created a new problem. Formerly men regarded the truth which they discovered, however
unpopular it might be to the many, as highly desirable because it was the truth. Yes?

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

464

Student: Well, I was just going to ask if it couldn’t be argued, by the nature of Plato’s
construction of the dialogue, that in a sense the truth was of such consequence . . . even terrible
enough so that it had to be presented in such a way so that terrible—
LS: Yes, but what does this mean? That people who are not concerned with the truth and want to
have lullabies would be shocked. But we are concerned with the question of whether men who
are concerned with the truth—philosophers, as they were called formerly—whether they would
not find the truth terrible, so that philosophy as such becomes for them a dubious thing because it
is destructive of humanity.
Student: Isn’t there another . . . that too, where people might be—might fear because there are
no truths. In other words, the thought that there are no absolute truths to be found.
LS: What does an absolute truth mean as distinguished from a relative truth?
Student: I wasn’t making a distinction between relative truth and absolute, I was thinking more
with regard to . . . the scientific method . . . reject that . . . as highly relative.
LS: Provisionally, provisionally, what would follow from that?
Same Student: . . . the same, the same state of doubt or . . .
LS: Yes, but it is very interesting that the ancient skeptics—the ancient skeptics—were perfectly
satisfied with the unavailability of what you call absolute truth. They found that the insight into
the fact that such truth is not available would relax one, and it would lead to a state of ataraxia:
of not being disturbed, and it would not lead to despair at all. The ancient skeptics were not
despairing men. They would only confirm what I said.
Same Student: I wasn’t disagreeing with you, I was just wondering why in modern times . . .
LS: Yes, that is a very important question, why this has changed. Now you mentioned the
example, when Nietzsche speaks of these matters, he mentions the deed of Copernicus, by which
man has lost his central position in the universe.xxiii Yes, but did Copernicus regard his insight
that the earth is not the center as depressing? They all regarded it as liberation. The people who
attacked everything believed in by previous men, like, say, the French materialists of the
eighteenth century—such people like Helvétius and Holbach and so, they were not unhappy
men, they were very happy. Good riddance to hell and all the other things which made life
miserable hitherto. That this so-called liberation from prejudice, superstition, or whatever would
be the most terrible thing which ever happened to men, that was Nietzsche’s assertion; in other
words, a liberation which leads into the greatest misery, into greater misery than that of the worst
slave labor camps and slave pens of the past. That was the point which Nietzsche had in mind. It
was an entirely new situation.

xxiii

See Friedrich Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morality (1887), treatise 3, section 25.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

465

Student: When Hume, at the very end of his discourse about human understanding, makes the
comment, “I have just read what I have done, and it shocked me. I am tempted to throw my
papers into the fire and burn them but I cannot. I must proceed for the sake of truth.”xxiv
LS: But does Hume strike you as a man who was very miserable? [Laughter]
Same Student: No, he sounds miserable.
LS: Pardon?
Same Student: In these passages, he sounds miserable.
LS: Yes, sounds miserable. But I think he reminds much more of the ancient skeptics who found
that the nonavailability of absolute truth is a convenient situation. I think Hume was a man who
was amazingly satisfied with the results of his inquiry. He did not suffer from that; at least that is
my impression. Mr. Zinman?
Mr. Zinman: I . . . made this point, but it seems that there perhaps you can make the distinction
between say the . . . of philosophy, the beginnings of the philosophical quest, and the quest itself,
in the sense that granted the quest itself is pleasant, even granted that perhaps the quest is
unfulfilled on the part of any . . . but it would seem that the effort that is necessary to begin that
quest requires a certain form of courage, even for the ancients—or at least that view seems
possible, in the sense that the effort that is necessary to leave the comfort of common opinion.
LS: Yes, sure. In this sense, sure. This makes sense. But that is not what we mean primarily by
intellectual courage.
Student: . . . in that sense this effort . . . courage . . .
LS: Yes. And also if you consider the situation: Theaetetus here, the younger Socrates there; and
Theatetus more moderate than courageous, and young Socrates more courageous rather than
moderate. Yes, that is true; that shows the presence of that problem. That is true. But it is not so
manifest as in Lucretius, where the truth that the visible universe will perish again is thought to
be a terrible truth, almost unbearable, and bearable only for philosophers. I think there is no
equivalent to that in Plato. So in other words, a kind of materialistic notion which, in Nietzsche’s
reaction to it in the nineteenth century, led to the phenomenon which I had in mind. Miss . . .
Student: . . . on Lucretius because he seems to show that philosophy is the only answer for all
humankind . . . garden . . . some solace in knowing that this is the truth. And it then seems
that . . . accept it, that only from the viewpoint of the city is this terrible, but from the viewpoint
of the philosopher, it isn’t terrible.
LS: Yes, but then you forget in a way what resignation is implied in the very notion of the
philosopher. The philosopher is a man who has resigned the greatest hopes which all other men
have. And to that extent he is already on the other side, and therefore after he has made this act
xxiv

The student paraphrases book 1, part 4, section 7 of David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature (1739).

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

466

of resignation, it is relatively simple for him to be happy. But at one time of his life, he had to
make this terrible sacrifice of the greatest hopes.
Same Student: But in the poem itself, it doesn’t seem as though he has to undergo this sort of
resignation and retire from society. He seems to accept that rather gladly.
LS: Yes, but that is not the main point, the retiring from society. The main point is becoming
reconciled to such things as the plague; you know, the plague described at the end, and not only
as an occurrence which takes place here and there, but as a necessary end of the world. And we
have today generally this posture: we are told by physics that the world has come into being, the
world as we know it, and will perish again. But this has taken such a long long time, [that] the
world in which human beings can live has come into being, and it will take billions of years until
the human race will have perished. But one can of course say what is a matter of a billions of
years is not a subject for reasonable worry. I mean, one should worry about what happens in the
next few years, or during one’s lifetime, and not [about] what happens billions of years after
one’s death. But I think that is the difference precisely between, say, a philosopher and an
administrator. [Laughter] The administrator cannot worry about what happens after [his death],
but the philosopher has to worry [LS chuckles] about these matters: merimnosophistai, the
sophists who worry about things about which other humans do not worry.xxv And in addition,
Lucretius creates the impression—and in a way he means it, of course—that what he is doing is
that he liberates his reader from the greatest horrors to which man is exposed. That is only half of
the story; there is also the other side to which I have referred. But we would have to study
Lucretius together in order to convince you, I hope, at least.
Now after having discussed the first and primary virtues, courage and moderation, Aristotle turns
to the “higher” or more sophisticated virtues. And the first which he mentions is liberality,
eleutheriotēs. Now this follows immediately on sōphrosynē, on moderation, because there is a
connection between moderation, dealing with the bodily desires and their satisfaction, and
liberality, dealing with wealth, because wealth is the general means for getting victuals. Now let
us read a few passages here. 1120a18f.—xxvi
Yes, a sign is that one can use it in the loose meaning of the term, the deliberative
understanding—“judicial understanding” might be better, to bring out the kinship with being
sensible as distinguished from possessing a science. Yes. Now what would seem to have the
highest rank of these kindred phenomena? We have the being-sensible of the private man in his
own affairs. We have the man who extends it beyond his self in the narrowest sense to his
family; then he is an oikonomikos, a manager of his household. And then if it’s still larger, then
he is a politikos, a man understanding the affairs of his city, and there are various stages there.
For example, a man might be good enough as a juryman, might be very sensible at that but not
good enough in the assembly, the policymaking assembly; and a man may be good enough at
that but would not be able to elaborate a code, say, for a colony to be sent out to Sicily or
elsewhere. Now what would be the highest there, in this diversity of forms which being sensible
can take? What would you say?
xxv

See Aristophanes, Clouds 101. The term that appears there is merimnophrontistai; the word Strauss
uses (merminosophistai) is apparently drawn from a scholiast’s gloss on that passage.
xxvi
There is a break in the tape at this point.

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

467

Student: Legislator?
LS: It would seem to be, yes. But let us see what follows.
Reader:
Now knowledge of one’s own interest will certainly be one kind of Prudence; though it is very
different from the other kinds, and people think that the man who knows and minds his own
business is prudent, and that politicians are busybodies: thus Euripides writes—
Would that be prudent? when I might have lived
A quiet life, a cipher in the crowd,
Sharing the common fortune . . .
Restless, aspiring, busy men of action . . .
For people seek their own good, and suppose that it is right to do so. Hence this belief has caused
the word ‘prudent’ to mean those who are wise in their own interest. Yet—
LS: Yes, in other words, here Aristotle makes a tentative case for the view that the man
concerned with his own good is more sensible than the others, say, according to the popular view
that the politicians are busybodies, i.e., they interfere with the affairs of other people. Yes, but
how does the argument go on?
Reader:
Yet probably as a matter of fact a man cannot pursue his own welfare without Domestic
Economy and without political life. xxvii
LS: Yes, so “probably.” The Greek word is again isōs; literally translated, “perhaps,” where one
never knows what Aristotle means by it, whether he is truly dubitative or whether he is only
urbane, in order to avoid a dogmatic assertion. So we have to leave it. And finally?
Reader:
Moreover, even the proper conduct of one’s own affairs is a difficult problem, and requires
consideration. (1141b33-1142a11)
LS: So in other words, it is not so simple then to draw the line between one’s own affairs and the
affairs of others. At least you must have friends; in this way another horizon must be
transcended. Yes.
Now these were the main passages I thought we should read. There is a very important chapter
later on at the end of the work, and 1143b18, practically until the end of the book, but I don’t
believe that the time at our disposal is sufficient. Perhaps we have a kind of free discussion of the
fundamental difficulty concerning practical wisdom and the question: what is the status of the
principles which we follow if we act sensibly? I mean, there is no such thing as a conscience in
Aristotle. The word doesn’t exist [for] a kind of innate faculty guiding us. It is something
xxvii

In Rackham’s translation: “and even Politics.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

468

acquired, [and] acquired by the proper kind of breeding. But then of course we must have a
standard which enables us to distinguish between the proper kind of breeding and the improper
one. How do we get that? Aristotle gives an occasional—in the first book, when he gives his
quasi-scientific definition of what happiness is, he says it consists in doing the work of man well.
So what is implied there is this: there is man, there is a nature of man, an essence of man, and
this nature points to its peculiar perfection, just as the acorn points to the oak and the kitten
points to the cat. Only in the case of man, this is all much more complicated. And the human
body, it is relatively simple, but regarding the human mind it is quite complicated. But still, as
we see, Aristotle would say there is such a thing as respectability or decency recognized, with
variations, everywhere. And even the disrespectable people recognize it, even if they refer to
themselves as crooks, as the other side also does, only they don’t find it wrong to be crooks but
they [still] admit that they are not the square ones. There is then some awareness of these things,
and this awareness Aristotle is trying to develop in this work. One can say there is a kind of
unwritten law of proper conduct, and Aristotle articulates this in his Ethics.
But still, this will perhaps not be quite sufficient. Aristotle makes a distinction, at which he
leaves matters, between happiness and moral virtue. All men want happiness, desire happiness.
This is the clear starting-point of the whole reflection of Aristotle. And somehow moral virtue
seems to be a means for becoming happy. But that is not quite the way in which we are to look at
it. I think I’ll read to you a passage which may help you when you think about these matters. I
take it from Cicero’s work on the ends of good and bad things, De Finibus, book 3, paragraph 6,
sections 20 to 25. Now this is official Stoic teaching, Stoic schools. According to that teaching
we must begin from the principles of nature, from the beginnings which nature has laid in us, put
in us. “Man’s first attraction is toward the things in accordance with nature. But as soon as he has
attained to understanding and has discerned the order and, so to speak, the harmony that should
govern conduct, he then esteems this harmony far more highly than all the things for which he
originally felt an affection,”xxviii and so on. We cannot read this now; you might read it at home.
Something like self-preservation, the desire for self-preservation, is the basis from which all life,
all moral life, starts. But then while we pursue our self-preservation we become aware that for
the sake of self-preservation we must cultivate our minds, for example, and do other things. And
then at a later stage we become aware that what originally came in only as a means is higher in
rank than that which it served, and this transformation of the means to an end, or something like
that, is assumed also in Aristotle. The primary desire is the desire for happiness, but this desire
becomes practically identical with the desire for noble conduct. And what noble conduct is we
see by looking around and by observing ourselves and others, and especially people of
refinement. And what this means is not too difficult to understand. Everyone, however crude and
coarse, will come into situations from time to time where he will see what crudeness and
coarseness is, and therefore by implication how un-nice they are, and therefore by implication
what refinement is.

xxviii

Strauss reads a modified version of Cicero, De finibus bonorum et malorum, ed. and trans. H.
Rackham (London: W Heinemann; New York: G. P. Putnam, 1931), 239. Rackham’s translation reads:
“Man’s first attraction is towards the things in accordance with nature; but as soon as he has
understanding, or rather become capable of ‘conception’—in Stoic phraseology ennoia—and has
discerned the order and so to speak harmony that governs conduct, he thereupon esteems this harmony far
more highly than all the things for which he originally felt an affection.”

Aristotle’s Ethics Session 25

469

So I must leave it at these remarks. Well, this is now the last meeting of this course, and I wish
you a nice summer and pleasant vacation.
1
2

Deleted “happiness.”
Deleted “of.”

