Men often speak of virtue without using the word but saying instead "the quality of life" or "the 
great society" or "ethical" or even "square." But do we know what virtue is? Socrates arrived at 
the conclusion that it is the greatest good for a human being to make everyday speeches about 
virtue-apparently without ever finding a completely satisfactory definition of it. However, if we 
seek the most elaborate and least ambiguous answer to this truly vital question, we shall turn to 
Aristotle's Ethics. There we read among other things that there is a virtue of the first order called 
magnanimitythe habit of claiming high honors for oneself with the understanding that one is 
worthy of them. We also read there that sense of shame is not a virtue: sense of shame is 
becoming for the young who, due to their immaturity, cannot help making mistakes, but not for 
mature and well-bred men who simply always do the right and proper thing. Wonderful as all this 
is-we have received a very different message from a very different quarter. When the prophet 
Isaiah received his vocation, he was overpowered by the sense of his unworthiness: "I am a man 
of unclean lips amidst a people of unclean lips." This amounts to an implicit condemnation of 
magnanimity and an implicit vindication of the sense of shame. The reason is given in the 
context: "holy, holy, holy is the lord of hosts." There is no holy god for Aristotle and the Greeks 
generally. Who is right, the Greeks or the Jews? Athens or Jerusalem? And how to proceed in 
order to find out who is right? Must we not admit that human wisdom is unable to settle this 
question and that every answer is based on an act of faith? But does this not constitute the 
complete and final de296 NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 297 feat of Athens? For a philosophy 
based on faith is no longer philosophy. Perhaps it was this unresolved conflict which has 
prevented Western thought from ever coming to rest. Perhaps it is this conflict which is at the 
bottom of a kind of thought which is philosophic indeed but no longer Greek: modern 
philosophy. It is in trying to understand modern philosophy that we come across Machiavelli. 
Machiavelli is the only political thinker whose name has come into common use for designating 
a kind of politics, which exists and will continue to exist independently of his influence, a 
politics guided exclusively by considerations of expediency, which uses all means, fair or foul, 
iron or poison, for achieving its ends-its end being the aggrandizement of one's country or 
fatherland-but also using the fatherland in the service of the self-aggrandizement of the politician 
or statesman or one's party. But if this phenomenon is as old as political society itself, why is it 
called after Machiavelli who thought or wrote only a short while ago, about 500 years ago? 
Machiavelli was the first publicly to defend it in books with his name on the title pages. 
Machiavelli made it publicly defensible. This means that his achievement, detestable or 
admirable, cannot be understood in terms of politics itself, or of the history of politics-say, in 
terms of the Italian Renaissancebut only in terms of political thought, of political philosophy, of 
the . Machiavelli appears to have broken with all preceding political philosophers. There is 
weighty evidence in support of this view Yet his largest political work ostensibly seeks to bring 
about the rebirth of the ancient Roman Republic; far from being a radical innovator, Machiavelli 
is a restorer of something old and forgotten. To find our bearings let us first cast a glance at two 
post-Machiavellian thinkers, Hobbes and Spinoza. Hobbes regarded his political philosophy as 
wholly new. More than that, he denied that there existed prior to his work any political 

philosophy or political science worthy of the name. He regarded himself as the founder of the 
true political philosophy, as the true founder of political philosophy. He knew of course that a 
political doctrine claiming to be true had existed since Socrates. But this doctrine was, according 
to Hobbes, a dream rather than science. He considered Socrates and his successors to be 
anarchists in that they permitted an appeal from the law of the land, the positive law, to a higher 
law, the natural law; they thus fostered a disorder utterly incompatible with civil society. 
According to Hobbes, on the other hand, the higher law, the natural law, commands so to speak 
one and only one thing: unqualified obedience to the sovereign power. It would not be difficult to 
show that this line of reasoning is contra- 298  dicted by Hobbes' own teaching; at any rate it 
does not go to the roots of the matter. Hobbes' serious objection to all earlier political philosophy 
comes out most clearly in this statement: "They that have written of justice and policy in general, 
do all invade each other and themselves, with contradiction. To reduce this doctrine to the rules 
and infallibility of reason, there is no way but first to put such principles down for a foundation, 
as passion not mistrusting may not seek to displace; and afterwards to build thereon the truth of 
cases in the law of nature (which hitherto had been built in the air) by degrees, till the whole be 
inexpugnable." The rationality of the political teaching consists in its being acceptable to 
passion, in its being agreeable to passion. The passion that must be the basis of the rational 
political teaching is fear of violent death. At first glance there seems to be an alternative to it, the 
passion of generosity, that is, "a glory, or pride in appearing not to need to break (one's 
word)"-but this "is a generosity too rarely found to be presumed on, especially in the pursuers of 
wealth, command or sensual pleasure; which are the greatest part of mankind." Hobbes attempts 
to build on the most common ground, on a ground that is admittedly low but has the advantage 
of being solid, whereas the traditional teaching was built on air. On this new basis, accordingly, 
the status of morality must be lowered; morality is nothing but fear-inspired peaceableness. The 
moral law or the natural law is understood as derivative from the right of nature, the right of 
self-preservation; the fundamental moral fact is a right, not a duty. This new sprit became the 
spirit of the modern era, including our own age. That spirit was preserved despite the important 
modifications that Hobbes' doctrine underwent at the hands of his great successors. Locke 
enlarged self-preservation to comfortable self-preservation and thus laid the theoretical 
foundation for the acquisitive society. Against the traditional view, according to which a just 
society is a society in which just men rule, Kant asserted: "Hard as it may sound, the problem of 
establishing the state [the just social order] is soluble even for a nation of devils, provided they 
have sense," that is, provided they are shrewd calculators. We discern this thought within the 
teachings of Marx, for the proletarians from whom he expects so much are surely not angels. 
Now although the revolution effected by Hobbes was decisively prepared by Machiavelli, 
Hobbes does not refer to Machiavelli. This fact requires further examination. Hobbes is in a way 
a teacher of Spinoza. Nevertheless Spinoza opens his Political Treatise with an attack on the 
philosophers. The philosophers, he says, treat the passions as vices. By ridiculing or deploring 
the passions, they praise and evince their belief in a nonexistent NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 299 
human nature; they conceive of men not as they are but as they would wish them to be. Hence 

their political teaching is wholly useless. Quite different is the case of the politici. They have 
learned from experience that there will be vices as long as there are human beings. Hence their 
political teaching is very valuable, and Spinoza is building his teaching on theirs. The greatest of 
these politici is the most penetrating Florentine, Machiavelli. It is Machiavelli's more subdued 
attack on traditional political philosophy that Spinoza takes over bodily and translates into the 
less reserved language of Hobbes. As for the sentence, "There will be vices as long as there will 
be human beings," Spinoza has tacitly borrowed it from Tacitus; in Spinoza's mouth it amounts 
to an unqualified rejection of the belief in a Messianic age; the coming of the Messianic age 
would require divine intervention or a miracle, but according to Spinoza miracles are impossible. 
Spinoza's introduction to his Political Treatise is obviously modeled on the 15th chapter of 
Machiavelli's Prince. There Machiavelli says: Since I know that many have written (on how 
princes should rule), I fear that by writing about it I will be held to be presumptuous by 
departing, especially in discussing such a subject, from the others. But since it is my intention to 
write something useful for him who understands, it has seemed to me to be more appropriate to 
go straight to the effective truth of the matter rather than to the imagination thereof. For many 
have imagined republics and principalities that have never been seen nor are known truly to 
exist. There is so great a distance between how one lives and how one ought to live that he who 
rejects what people do in favor of what one ought to do, brings about his ruin rather than his 
preservation; for a man who wishes to do in every matter what is good, will be ruined among so 
many who are not good. Hence it is necessary for a prince who wishes to maintain himself, to 
learn to be able not to be good, or use goodness and abstain from using it according to the 
commands of circumstances. One arrives at imagined kingdoms or republics if one takes one's 
bearings by how man ought to live, by virtue. The classical philosophers did just that. They thus 
arrived at the best regimes of the Republic and the Politics. But when speaking of imagined 
kingdoms, Machiavelli thinks not only of the philosophers; he also thinks of the kingdom of God 
which from his point of view is a conceit of visionaries for, as his pupil Spinoza said, justice 
rules only where just men rule. But to stay with the philosophers, they regarded the actualization 
of the best regime as possible, but extremely improbable. According to Plato its actualization 
literally depends on a coincidence, a most unlikely coincidence, the coincidence of philosophy 
and political power. The actualization of the best regime depends on chance, on Fortuna, that is, 
on 300  something which is essentially beyond human control. According to Machiavelli, 
however, Fortuna is a woman who as such must be hit and beaten to be kept under; Fortuna can 
be vanquished by the right kind of man. There is a connection between this posture toward 
Fortuna and the orientation by how many do live: by lowering the standards of political 
excellence one guarantees the actualization of the only kind of political order that in principle is 
possible. In post-Machiavellian parlance: the ideal of the right kind necessarily becomes actual; 
the ideal and the actual necessarily converge. This way of thinking has had an amazing success; 
if someone maintains today that there is no guarantee for the actualization of the ideal, he must 
fear to be called a cynic. Machiavelli is not concerned with how men do live merely in order to 
describe it; his intention is rather, on the basis of knowledge of how men do live, to teach princes 

how they ought to rule and even how they ought to live. Accordingly he rewrites, as it were, 
Aristotle's Ethics. To some extent he admits that the traditional teaching is true: men are obliged 
to live virtuously in the Aristotelian sense. But he denies that living virtuously is living happily 
or leads to happiness. "If liberality is used in the manner in which you are obliged to use it, it 
hurts you; for if you use it virtuously and as one ought to use it," the prince will ruin himself and 
will be compelled to rule his subii oppressively in order to get the necessary money. Miserliness, 
the oppusite of liberality, is "one of the vices that enable a prince to rule." A prince ought to be 
liberal, however, with the property of others, for this increases his reputation. Similar 
considerations apply to compas sion and its opposite, cruelty. This leads Machiavelli to the 
question of whether it is better for a prince to be loved rather than to be feared or vice versa. It is 
difficult to be both loved and feared. Since one must therefore choose, one ought to choose being 
feared rather than being loved, for whether one is loved depends on others, while being feared 
depends on oneself. But one must avoid becoming hated; the prince will avoid becoming hated if 
he abstains from the property and the women of his subjects especially from their property, 
which men so love that they resent less the murder of their father than the loss of their patrimony. 
In war the reputation for cruelty does not do any harm. The greatest example is Hannibal who 
was always implicitly obeyed by his soldiers and never had to contend with mutinies either after 
victories or after defeats. "This could not arise from anything but his inhuman cruelty which, 
together with his innumerable virtues, made him always venerable and terrible in the eyes of his 
soldiers, and without which cruelty his other virtues would not have sufficed. Not NICCOLO 
MACHIAVELLI 301 very considerately do the writers on the one hand admire his action and on 
the other condemn the main cause of the same." We note that inhuman cruelty is one of 
Hannibal's virtues. Another example of cruelty "well used" is supplied by Cesare Borgia's 
pacification of the Romagna. In order to pacify that country, he put at its head Ramirro d'Orco, "a 
man of cruelty and dispatch," and gave him the fullest power. Ramirro succeeded in no time, 
acquiring the greatest reputation. But then Cesare thought that such an excessive power was no 
longer necessary and might make him hated; he knew that the rigorous measures taken by 
Ramirro had caused some hatred. Cesare wished therefore to show that if any cruelty had been 
committed, it was not his doing but arose from the harsh nature of his subordinate. Therefore he 
had him put one morning in two pieces on the Piazza of the chief town, with a piece of wood and 
a bloody knife at his side. The ferocity of this sight induced in the populace a state of satisfaction 
and stupor. Machiavelli's new "ought" demands then the judicious and vigorous use of both 
virtue and vice according to the requirements of the circumstances. The judicious alternation of 
virtue and vice is virtue (virtú) in his meaning of the word. He amuses himself and, I believe, 
some of his readers by using the word "virtue" in both the traditional sense and his sense. 
Occasionally he makes a distinction between virtú and bontà. That distinction was in a way 
prepared by Cicero who says that men are called "good" on account of their modesty, 
temperance, and above all, justice and keeping of faith, as distinguished from courage and 
wisdom. The Ciceronian distinction within the virtues in its turn reminds us of Plato's Republic 
in which temperance and justice are presented as virtues required of all, whereas courage and 

wisdom are required only of some. Machiavelli's distinction between goodness and other virtues 
tends to become an opposition between goodness and virtue: while virtue is required of rulers 
and soldiers, goodness is required, or characteristic, of the populace engaged in peaceful 
occupations; goodness comes to mean something like fear-bred obedience to the government, or 
even vileness. In quite a few passages of the Prince, Machiavelli speaks of morality in the way in 
which decent men have spoken of it at all times. Hе resolves the contradiction in the 19th 
chapter, in which he discusses the Roman emperors who came after the philosopher-emperor 
Marcus Aurelius up to Maximinus. The high point is his discussion of the emperor Severus. 
Severus belonged to those emperors who were most cruel and rapacious. Yet in him was so great 
virtue that he could always reign with felicity, for he knew well how to use the person of 302  the 
fox and the lion-which natures a prince must imitate. A new prince in a new principality cannot 
imitate the actions of the good emperor Marcus Aurelius, nor is it necessary for him to follow 
those of Severus; but he ought to take from Severus those portions that are necessary for 
founding his state and from Marcus those that are appropriate and glorious for preserving a state 
already firmly established. The chief theme of the Prince is the wholly new prince in a wholly 
new state, that is, the founder. And the model for the founder as founder is the extremely clever 
criminal Severus. This means that justice is precisely not, as Augustine had said, the 
fundamentum regnorum; the foundation of justice is injustice; the foundation of morality is 
immorality; the foundation of legitimacy is illegitimacy or revolution; the foundation of freedom 
is tyranny. At the beginning there is Terror, not Harmony, or Love--but there is of course a great 
difference between Terror for its own sake, for the sake of its perpetuation, and Terror that limits 
itself to laying the foundation for the degree of humanity and freedom that is compatible with the 
human condition. But this distinction is at best hinted at in the Prince. The comforting message 
of the Prince is given in the last chapter, which is an exhortation addressed to one Italian prince, 
Lorenzo de'- Medici, to take Italy and to liberate her from the barbarians, that is, the French, the 
Spaniards, and the Germans. Machiavelli tells Lorenzc that the liberation of Italy is not very 
difficult. One of the reasons ne gives is that "extraordinary events without example that have 
been induced by God, are seen: the sea has divided itself, the cloud has led you on your way, the 
stone has poured out water, manna has rained." The events without example do have an example: 
the miracles following Israel's liberation from Egyptian bondage. What Machiavelli seems to 
suggest is that Italy is the promised land for Lorenzo. But there is one difficulty: Moses, who led 
Israel out of the house of bondage towards the promised land, did not reach that land; he died at 
its borders. Machiavelli thus darkly prophesied that Lorenzo would not liberate Italy, one reason 
being that he lacked the extraordinary virtú needed for bringing that great work to its 
consummation. But there is more to the extraordinary events without example of which nothing 
is known other than what Machiavelli asserts about them. All these extraordinary events 
occurred before the revelation on Sinai. What Machiavelli prophesies is, then, that a new 
revelation, a revelation of a new Decalogue is imminent. The bringer of that revelation is of 
course not that mediocrity Lorenzo, but a new Moses. That new Moses is Machiavelli himself, 
and the new Decalogue is the wholly new teaching on the wholly new prince in a wholly new 

state. It is true that NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 303 Moses was an armed prophet and that 
Machiavelli belongs to the unarmed ones who necessarily come to ruin. In order to find the 
solution of this difficulty one must turn to the other great work of Machiavelli, the Discourses on 
the First Ten Books of Livy. Yet if one turns from the Prince to the Discourses in order to find 
the solution to the difficulties not solved in the Prince, one goes from the frying pan into the fire. 
For the Discourses is much more difficult to understand than the Prince. It is impossible to show 
this without at first inducing in the reader a certain bewilderment; but such bewilderment is the 
beginning of understanding. The Let us begin at the very beginning, the Epistles Dedicatory. 
Prince is dedicated to Machiavelli's master, Lorenzo de'Medici. Machiavelli who presents 
himself as a man of the lowest condition, as living in a low place is so overwhelmed by his 
master's grandeur that he regards the Prince, although it is his most cherished possessiori, as 
unworthy of the presence of Lorenzo. He recommends his work by the observation that it is a 
small volume which the addressee can understand in the shortest time, although it embodies 
everything that the author has come to know and understand in very many years and under great 
perils. The Discourses is dedicated to two young friends of Machiavelli who have compelled him 
to write that book. At the same time the book is a token of Machiavelli's gratitude for the benefits 
he has received from his two friends. He had dedicated the Prince to his master in the hope that 
he would receive favors from him. And he does not know whether Lorenzo will pay any 
attention to the Princewhether he would not be more pleased with receiving a horse of 
exceptional beauty. In accordance with all this he disparages in the Epistle Dedicatory to the 
Discourses the custom that he had complied with in the Epistle Dedicatory to the Prince-the 
custom of dedicating one's works to princes: the Discourses is dedicated not to princes but to 
men who deserve to be princes. Whether Lorenzo deserves to be a prince remains a question. 
These differences between the two books can be illustrated by the fact that in the Prince 
Machiavelli avoids certain terms that he uses in the Discourses. The Prince fails to mention the 
conscience, the common good, tyrants (that is, the distinction between kings and tyrants), and 
heaven; also in the Prince "we" never means "we Christians." One might mention here that 
Machiavelli refers in neither work to the distinction between this world and the next, or between 
this life and the next; nor does he mention in either work the devil or hell; above all, he never 
mentions in either work the soul. Now let us come to the text of the Discourses. What is the Dis- 
304  courses about? What kind of book is it? There is no such difficulty regarding the Prince. 
The Prince is a mirror of princes, and mirrors of princes were a traditional genre. In accordance 
with this, all chapter headings of the Prince are in Latin. This is not to deny but rather to 
underline the fact that the Prince transmits a revolutionary teaching in a traditional guise. But this 
traditional guise is missing in the Discourses. None of its chapter headings is in Latin although 
the work deals with an ancient and traditional subject: with ancient Rome. Furthermore, the 
Prince is tolerably easy to understand because it has a tolerably clear plan. The plan of the 
Discourses, however, is extremely obscure, so much so that one is tempted to wonder whether it 
has any plan. In addition, the Discourses presents itself as devoted to the first ten books of Livy. 
Livy's first ten books lead from the beginnings of Rome to the time immediately preceding the 

first Punic war, that is, up to the peak of the uncorrupted Roman Republic, and prior to Roman 
conquests outside of the Italian mainland. But Machiavelli deals in the Discourses to some extent 
with the whole of Roman history as covered by Livy's work: Livy's work consists of 142 books 
and the Discourses consists of 142 chapters. Livy's work leads up to the time of the emperor 
Augustus, that is, the beginnings of Christianity. At any rate, the Discourses, more than four 
times as extensive as the Prince, seems to be much more comprehensive than the Prince. Machia 
velli explicitly excludes only one subject from treatment in the Discourses: "How dangerous it is 
to make oneself the head of a new thing that concerns many, and how difficult it is to handle it 
and to consummate it and after its consummation to maintain it would be too long and exalted a 
matter to discuss; I shall reserve it therefore for a more appropriate place." Yet it is precisely this 
long and exalted matter that Machiavelli explicitly discusses in the Prince: "One must consider 
that nothing is more difficult to handle, nor more doubtful of success, nor more dangerous to 
manage than to make oneself the head of the introduction of new orders." It is true that 
Machiavelli does not speak here of "maintaining." Such maintaining, as we learn from the 
Discourses, is best done by the people, while the introduction of new modes and orders is best 
done by princes. From this one may draw the conclusion that the characteristic subject of the 
Discourses, as distinguished from the Prince, is the people-a conclusion by no means absurd but 
quite insufficient for one's even beginning to understand the work. The character of the 
Discourses may be further illustrated with two examples of another kind of difficulty. In II 13, 
Machiavelli asserts and in a manner proves that one rises from a low or abject position to an 
exalted one through fraud rather than through force. This is what NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 
305 the Roman Republic did in its beginnings. Before speaking of the Roman Republic, 
however, Machiavelli speaks of four princes who rose from a low or abject position to a high 
one. He speaks most extensively of Cyrus, the founder of the Persian empire. The example of 
Cyrus is the central one. Cyrus rose to power by deceiving the king of Media, his uncle. But if he 
was, to begin with, the nephew of the king of Media, how can he be said to have risen from a low 
or abject position? To drive home his point, Machiavelli mentions next Giovan Galeazzo who 
through fraud took away the state and the power from Bernabò, his uncle. Galeazzo too was then 
to begin with the nephew of a ruling prince and cannot be said to have risen from a low or abject 
position. What, then, does Machiavelli indicate by speaking in such a riddling way? III 48: when 
one sees an enemy commit a great mistake, one must believe that there is fraud beneath; this is 
said in the heading of the chapter; in the text Machiavelli goes further and says "there will 
always be fraud beneath it." Yet immediately afterward, in the central example, Machiavelli 
shows that the Romans once committed a great mistake through demoralization, that is, not 
fraudulently. How is one to deal with the difficulties that confront us in the Discourses? Let us 
return to the title: Discourses on the First Ten Books of Livy. The title is not literally correct but 
it is safe to say that the work consists primarily of Discourses on the First Ten Books of Livy. We 
have noted furthermore that the Discourses lacks a clear plan: perhaps the plan will become 
visible if we take seriously the fact that the work is devoted to Livy; perhaps Machiavelli follows 
Livy by following the Livian order. Again this is not simply true, but it is true if it is intelligently 

understood: Machiavelli's use and nonuse of Livy is the key to the understanding of the work. 
There are various ways in which Machiavelli uses Livy: sometimes he makes tacit use of a 
Livian story, sometimes he refers to "this text," sometimes he mentions Livy by name, 
sometimes he quotes him (in Latin) not mentioning or mentioning his name. Machiavelli's use of 
and nonuse of Livy may be illustrated by the facts that he does not quote Livy in the first ten 
chapters, that he quotes him in the following five chapters and again fails to quote him in the 
following 24 chapters. Understanding the reasons behind these facts is the key to the 
understanding of the Discourses. I cannot treat this matter conclusively within the space at my 
disposal, but will deal with it through a selection of the following five chapters or quasi-chapters: 
I proem, II proem, II 1, I 26 and II 5. In the proem to I, Machiavelli lets us know that he has 
discovered 306  new modes and orders, that he has taken a road that was never trodden by 
anyone before. He compares his achievement to the discovery of unknown waters and lands: he 
presents himself as the Columbus of the moral-political world. What prompted him was the 
natural desire that he always had, to do those things that in his opinion bring about the common 
benefit of each. Therefore he bravely faces the dangers that he knows lie in wait for him. What 
are these dangers? In the case of the discovery of unknown seas and lands, the danger consists in 
seeking them; once you have found the unknown lands and have returned home, you are safe. In 
the case of the discovery of new modes and orders, however, the danger consists in finding them, 
that is, in making them publicly known. For, as we have heard from Machiavelli, it is dangerous 
to make oneself the head of something new which affects many. To our great surprise, 
Machiavelli identifies immediately afterwards the new modes and orders with those of antiquity: 
his discovery is only a rediscovery. He refers to the contemporary concern with fragments of 
ancient statues, which are held in high honor and used as models by contemporary sculptors. It is 
all the more surprising that no one thinks of imitating the most virtuous actions of ancient 
kingdoms and republics, with the deplorable result that no trace of ancient virtue remains. The 
present-day lawyers learn their craft from the - cient lawyers. The present-day physicians base 
their judgements of. ine experience of the ancient physicians. It is therefore all the more 
surprising that in political and military matters the present-day princes and republics do not have 
recourse to the examples of the ancients. This results not so much from the weakness into which 
the presentday religion has led the world or from the evil that ambitious leisure has done to many 
Christian countries and cities, as from insufficient understanding of the histories and especially 
that of Livy. As a consequence, Machiavelli's contemporaries believe that the imitation of the 
ancients is not only difficult but impossible. Yet this is plainly absurd: the natural order, 
including the nature of man, is the same as in antiquity. We understand now why the discovery of 
new modes and orders, which is only the rediscovery of the ancient modes and orders, is 
dangerous. That rediscovery which leads up to the demands that the virtue of the ancients be 
imitated by present-day men, runs counter to the present-day religion: it is that religion which 
teaches that the imitation of ancient virtue is impossible, that it is morally impossible, for the 
virtues of the pagans are only resplendent vices. What Machiavelli will have to achieve in the 
Discourses is not merely the NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 307 presentation, but the 

re-habilitation, of ancient virtue against the Christian critique. This does not dispose of the 
difficulty that the discovery of new modes and orders is only the re-discovery of the ancient 
modes and orders. This much, however, is clear. Machiavelli cannot take for granted the 
superiority of the ancients; he must establish it. Therefore he must first find a ground common to 
the admirers and the detractors of antiquity. That common ground is the veneration of the 
ancient, be it biblical or pagan. He starts from the tacit premise that the good is the old and hence 
that the best is the oldest. He is thus led first to ancient Egypt, which flourished in the most 
ancient antiquity. But this does not help very much because too little is known of ancient Egypt. 
Machiavelli settles, therefore, for that oldest which is sufficiently known and at the same time his 
own: ancient Rome. Yet ancient Rome is not evidently admirable in every important respect. A 
strong case can be made, and had been made, for the superiority of Sparta to Rome. Machiavelli 
must therefore establish the authority of ancient Rome. The general manner in which he does this 
reminds one of the manner in which theologians formerly established the authority of the Bible 
against unbelievers. But ancient Rome is not a book like the Bible. Yet by establishing the 
authority of ancient Rome, Machiavelli establishes the authority of its chief historian, of Livy, 
and therewith of the book. Livy's history is Machiavelli's Bible. From this it follows that 
Machiavelli cannot begin to use Livy before he has established the authority of Rome. He begins 
to quote Livy in the section on the Roman religion (I 11-15). In the preceding chapter he had 
contrasted Caesar as the founder of a tyranny with Romulus as the founder of a free city. The 
glory of Caesar is due to the writers who celebrated him because their judgement was corrupted 
by his extraordinary success, the foundation of the rule of the emperors; the emperors did not 
permit writers to speak freely of Caesar. Yet the free writers knew how to circumvent that 
restriction: they blamed Catilina, Caesar's luckless prefiguration, and they celebrated Brutus, 
Caesar's enemy. But not all emperors were bad. The times of the emperors from Nerva to Marcus 
Aurelius were the golden times when everyone could hold and defend any opinion he pleased: 
golden are the times when thought and expression of thought are not restricted by authority. 
Those remarks form in effect the introduction to Machiavelli's treatment of the Roman religion. 
He there treats the pagan religion as at least equal as religion to the biblical religion. The 
principle of all religion is authority, that is, precisely that which Machiavelli had questioned 
immediately before. But for the rul- 308  ing class of ancient Rome, religion was not an 
authority; they used religion for their political purposes, and they did this in the most admirable 
manner. The praise of the religion of ancient Rome implies, and more than implies a critique of 
the religion of modern Rome. Machiavelli praises the religion of ancient Rome for the same 
reason for which the free writers who were subject to the authority of the Caesars praised Brutus: 
he could not openly blame the authority of Christianity to which he was subject. Hence if Livy's 
history is Machiavelli's Bible, it is his anti-Bible. After he has established the authority of ancient 
Rome and shown its superiority to the moderns by many examples, he begins to intimate the 
defects from which it suffered. Only from this point on is Livy, as distinguished from Rome-that 
is, a book-his sole authority. Yet shortly before the end of Book One, he openly questions the 
opinion of all writers, including Livy, on a matter of the greatest importance. Hе thus leads us 

step by step to the realization of why the old modes and orders which he has rediscovered, are 
new: 1) The modes and orders of ancient Rome were established under the pressure of 
circumstances, by trial and error, without a coherent plan, without understanding of their reasons; 
Machiavelli supplies the reasons and is therefore able to correct some of the old modes and 
orders. 2) The spirit that animated the old modes and orders was veneration for tradition, for 
authe the spirit of piety, while Machiavelli is animated by an altogetner different spirit. The 
progress of the argument in Book One is indicated most clearly. While Book One begins with the 
highest praise of the most ancient antiquity, it ends with the expression "very young": many 
Romans celebrated their triumphs giovanissimi. We arere thus prepared for understanding the 
proem of Book Two. There Machiavelli openly questions the prejudice in favor of the ancient 
times: "men praise always the ancient times and accuse the present, but not always with reason." 
In truth the world has always been the same; the quantity of good and evil is always the same. 
What changes is the different countries and nations, which have times of virtue and times of 
degeneracy. In antiquity virtue resided at first in Assyria and finally in Rome. After the 
destruction of the Roman Empire virtue revived only in some parts of it, especially in Turkey. So 
that someone born in our time in Greece who has not become a Turk reasonably blames the 
present and praises antiquity. Accordingly, Machiavelli is perfectly justified in praising the times 
of the ancient Romans and blaming his own time: no trace of ancient virtue is left in Rome and 
in Italy. Therefore he exhorts the young to imitate the ancient Romans whenever fortune gives 
them the opportunity to do NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 309 so, that is, to do what he was 
prevented from doing by the malignity of the times and of fortune. The message of the proem to 
Book Two could seem to be rather meager, at least as compared with that of the proem to Book 
One. This is due to the fact that the proem to Book One is the introduction to the whole work, 
while the proem to Book Two is the introduction only to Book Two and more particularly to the 
early chapters of Book Two. There Machiavelli first takes isstue with an opinion of Plutarch, 
whom he calls a weighty author-he never applies this epithet to Livy -an opinion also shared by 
Livy and even by the Roman people themselves: the opinion that the Romans acquired their 
empire through fortune rather than through virtue. Prior to the Roman conquest, the whole of 
Europe was inhabited by three peoples who defended their freedom obstinately and who 
governed themselves freely, that is, as republics. Hence Rome needed excessive virtue to 
conquer them. How then does it come about that in those ancient times those peoples were 
greater lovers of freedom than they are today? According to Machiavelli, this is ultimately due to 
the difference between the ancient religion and our religion. Our religion has placed the highest 
good in humility, abjectness, and the disparagement of the human things, whereas the ancient 
religion has placed the highest good in greatness of mind, strength of the body, and in all other 
things apt to make men most strong. But the disarmament of the world and of heaven itself is 
ultimately due to the destruction of the Roman Empire, of all republican life. Apart from her 
excessive virtue, the second reason for Rome's greatness was her liberal admission of foreigners 
to citizenship. But such a policy exposes a state to great dangers, as the Athenians and especially 
the Spartans knew who feared that the admixture of new inhabitants would corrupt the ancient 

customs. Owing to the Roman policy, many men who never knew republican life and did not 
care for it, that is, many orientals, became Roman citizens. The Roman conquest of the East thus 
completed what her conquest of the West had begun. And thus it came about that the Roman 
Republic was, on the one hand, the direct opposite of the Christian republic, and, on the other 
hand, the cause of the Christian republic and even the model for it. Book Three has no proem but 
its first chapter performs the function of a proem. By this slight irregularity Machiavelli 
underlines the fact that the number of chapters of the Discourses equals the number of books of 
Livy's history, and Livy's history, as we noted before, extends from the origin of Rome until the 
time of the emergence of Christianity. The heading of the first chapter of Book Three reads as 
310  follows: "If one wishes that a sect or a republic live long, one must bring it back frequently 
to its beginning." While the heading speaks only of sects and republics, the chapter itself deals 
with republics, sects, and kingdoms; sects, that is, religions, occupy the center. All things of the 
world have a limit to their course-a limit set by heaven. But they reach that limit only if they are 
kept in order, and this means if they are frequently brought back to their beginnings; for in their 
beginnings they must have had some goodness, otherwise they would not have gained their first 
reputation and increase. Machiavelli proves his thesis first regarding republics, by the example of 
Rome's regaining new life and new virtue after her defeat by the Gauls: Rome then resumed the 
observance of religion and justice, that is, of the old orders, especially those of religion, through 
the neglect of which she had suffered disaster. The recovery of ancient virtue consists of the 
reimposition of the terror and fear that had made men good at the beginning. Machiavelli thus 
explains what his concern with the recovery of ancient modes and orders means fundamentally: 
men were good at the beginning, not because of innocence but because they were gripped by 
terror and fear-by the initial and radical terror and fear; at the beginning there is not Love but 
Terror; Machiavelli's wholly new teaching is based on this alleged insight (which anticipates 
Hobbes' doctrine of the state of nature). Machiavelli turns then to the discussion of sects; he 
illustrates his thesis by the example of "our religion": "If our religion had not been brought back 
to its beginning or principle by St. Francis and St. Dominic, it would have become completely 
extinguished, for by poverty and the example of Christ they brought that religion back into the 
minds of men where it was already extinguished; and these new orders were so potent that they 
are the reason why the immorality of the prelates and of the heads of the religion do not ruin our 
religion; for the Franciscans and the Dominicans live still in poverty and have so great credit 
with the peoples through confession and preachings that they convince the peoples that it is evil 
to speak evil of evil and that it is good to live in obedience to the prelates, and if the prelates sin, 
to leave them for punishment to God. Thus the prelates do the worst they can, for they do not 
fear the punishment that they do not see and in which they do not believe. That innovation 
therefore has maintained, and maintains, that religion." Here the retur to the beginning was 
achieved by the introduction of new orders. Machiavelli doubtless says this here because he did 
not think that the Franciscan and Dominican reforms amounted to a simple res- NICCOLO 
MACHIAVELLI 311 toration of primitive Christianity, for those reforms left intact the Christian 
hierarchy. But the introduction of new orders is necessary also in republics, as Machiavelli 

emphasizes in the concluding chapter of the Discour ses: the restoration of the ancient modes and 
orders is in all cases, including that of Machiavelli himself, the introduction of new modes and 
orders. Nevertheless there is a great difference between the Franciscan and Dominican 
renovation and republican renovations: republican renovations subject the whole republic, 
including the leading man, to the initial terror and fear precisely because they resist evil-because 
they punish evil visibly and hence credibly. The Christian command or counsel not to resist evil 
is based on the premise that the beginning or principle is love. That command or counsel can 
only lead to the utmost disorder or else to evasion. The premise, however, turns into its extreme 
opposite. We have seen that the number of chapters of the Discourses is meaningful and has been 
deliberately chøsen. We may thus be induced to wonder whether the number of chapters of the 
Prince is not also meaningful. The Prince consists of 26 chapters. Twentysix is the numerical 
value of the letters of the sacred name of God in Hebrew, of the Tetragrammaton. But did 
Machiavelli know of this? I do not know. Twenty-six equals 2 times 13. Thirteen is now and for 
quite sometime has been considered an unlucky number, but in former times it was also and even 
primarily considered a lucky number. So "twice 13" might mean both good luck and bad luck, 
and hence altogether: luck, fortuna. A case can be made for the view that Machiavelli's theology 
can be expressed by the formula Deus sive fortuna (as distinguished from Spinoza's Deus sive 
natura)-that is, that God is fortuna as supposed to be subject to human influence (imprecation). 
But to establish this would require an argument "too long and too exalted" for the present 
occasion. Let us therefore see whether we cannot get some help from looking at the 26th chapter 
of the Discourses. The heading of the chapter reads as follows: "A new prince, in a city or 
country taken by him, must make everything new." The subject of the chapter is then the new 
prince in a new state, that is, the most exalted subject of the Prince. At the end of the preceding 
chapter Machiavelli had said: he who wishes to establish an absolute power, which the writers 
call tyranny, must renew everything. The subject of our chapter is then tyranny, but the term 
"tyranny" never occurs in that chapter: "tyranny" is avoided in the 26th chapter of the Discourses 
just as it is avoided in the Prince, which consists of 26 312 chapters. The lesson of the  chapter 
itself is this: a new prince who wishes to establish absolute power in his state must make 
everything new; he must establish new magistracies, with new names, new authorities and new 
men; he must make the rich poor and the poor rich, as David did when he became king: qui 
esurientes implevit bonis, et divites dimisit inanes. In sum, he must not leave anything in his 
country untouched, and there must not be any rank or wealth that its possessors do not recognize 
as owing to the prince. The modes that he must use are most cruel and inimical, not only to every 
Christian life, but even to every humane one; so that everyone must prefer to live as a private 
man rather than as a king with so great a ruin of human beings." The Latin quotation that occurs 
in this chapter is translated in the Revised Version as follows: "He hath filled the hungry with 
good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away." The quotation forms part of the Magnificat, 
the Virgin Mary's prayer of thanks after she had heard from the angel Gabriel that she would 
bring forth a son to be called Jesus; he that "hath filled the hungry with good things, and sent the 
rich empty away" is none other than God himself. In the context of this chapter this means that 

God is a tyrant, and that king David who made the rich poor and the poor rich, was a Godly king, 
a king who walked in the ways of the Lord be: d he proceeded in the tyrannical way. We must 
note that this is kin sole New Testament quotation occurring in the Discourses or in the Prince. 
And that sole New Testament quotation is used for expressing a most horrible blasphemy. 
Someone might say in dfense of Machiavelli that the blasphemy is not expressly uttered but only 
implied. But this defense, far from helping Machiavelli, makes his case worse, and for this 
reason: When a man openly utters or vomits a blasphemy, all good men shudder and turn away 
from him, or punish him according to his deserts; the sin is entirely his. But a concealed 
blasphemy is so insidious, not only because it protects the blasphemer against punishment by due 
process of law, but above all because it practically compels the hearer or reader to think the 
blasphemy by himself and thus to become an accomplice of the blasphemer. Machiavelli thus 
establishes a kind of intimacy with his readers par excellence, whom he calls "the young," by 
inducing them to think forbidden or criminal thoughts. Such an intimacy seems also to be 
established by every prosecutor or judge who, in order to convict the criminal, must think 
criminal thoughts, but that intimacy is abhorred by the criminal. Machiavelli, how- NICCOLO 
MACHIAVELLI 313 ever, intends it and desires it. This is an important part of his education of 
the young or, to use the time-honored expression, of his corruption of the young. If space 
permitted it, we might profitably consider the other chapters of the Discourses whose numbers 
are multiples of 13. І shall consider only one of them: Book Two, chapter 5. The heading of this 
chapter runs as follows: "That the change of sects and languages together with floods and 
plagues destroys the memory of things." Machiavelli begins this chapter by taking issue with 
certain philosophers by stating an objection to their contention. The philosophers in question say 
that the world is eternal. Machiavelli "believes" that one could reply to them as follows: if the 
world were as old as they contend, it would be reasonable that there would be memory of more 
than 5,000 years (that is, the memory we have thanks to the Bible). Machiavelli opposes 
Aristotle in the name of the Bible. But he continues: one could make that rejoinder if one did not 
see that the memories of times are destroyed by various causes, partly originated in human 
beings, partly originated in heaven. Machiavelli refuted then an alleged refutation of Aristotle, of 
the best-known anti-biblical argument of the Aristotelians. He continues as follows: the causes 
originating in human beings are the changes of sects and of language. For when a new sect, that 
is, a new religion arises, its first concern is, in order to acquire reputation, to extinguish the old 
religion; and when those who establish the orders of the new sects are of a different language, 
they destroy the old sect easily. One realizes this by considering the procedure used by the 
Christian sect against the gentile sect; the former has ruined all orders, all ceremonies of the 
latter, and destroyed every memory of that ancient theology. It is true that it has not succeeded in 
completely destroying the knowledge of the things done by the excellent men among the gentiles 
and this was due to the fact that it preserved the Latin language, which the Christians were forced 
to use in writing their new law. For had they been able to write that law in a new language, there 
would be no record whatever of the things of the past. One has only to read of the proceedings of 
St. Gregory and the other heads of the Christian religion in order to see with how great an 

obstinacy they persecuted all ancient memories by burning the works of the poets and of the 
historians, by ruining the images and spoiling every other sign of antiquity; if they had joined to 
that persecution a new language, everything would have been forgotten in the shortest time. 
Through 314  these extraordinary overstatements Machiavelli sketches the. background of his 
own work, in particular of his recovery of his cherished Livy, the largest part of whose history 
has been lost owing to "the malignity of the times" (I 2). Furthermore, he here silently contrasts 
the conduct of the Christians with that of the Muslims whose new law was written in a new 
language. The difference between the Christians and the Muslims is not that the Christians had a 
greater respect for pagan antiquity than the Muslims, but that the Christians did not conquer the 
Western Roman empire as the Muslims conquered the Eastern, and were therefore forced to 
adopt the Latin language and therefore to some extent to preserve the literature of pagan Rome, 
and thereby preserve their mortal enemy. Shortly thereafter Machiavelli says that these sects 
change two or three times in 5,000 or 6,000 years. He thus determines the life span of 
Christianity; the maximum would be 3,000 years, the minimum 1,666 years. This means that 
Christianity might come to an end about 150 years after the Discourses were written. Machiavelli 
was not the first to engage in speculations of this kind (cf. Gemistos Plethon who was much 
more sanguine or apprehensive than Machiavelli). The most important point, however, that 
Machiavelli makes through this statement is that all religions, including Christiarity. are of 
human, not heavenly origin. The changes of heavenly origin that destroy the memory of things 
are plagues, hunger, and floods: the heavenly is the natural; the supra-natural is human. The 
substance of what Machiavelli says or suggests regarding religion is not original. As is indicated 
by his use of the term "sect" for religion, he goes in the ways of Averroism, that is, of those 
medieval Aristotelians who as philosophers refused to make any concessions to revealed 
religion. While the substance of Machiavelli's religious teaching is not original, his manner of 
setting it forth is very ingenious. He recognizes in fact no theology but civil theology, theology 
serving the state and to be used or not used by the state as circumstances suggest. He indicates 
that religions can be dispensed with if there is a strong and able monarch. This implies indeed 
that religion is indispensable in republics. The moral-political teaching of the Discourses is 
fundamentally the same as that of the Prince but with one important difference: the Discourses 
state powerfully the case for republics while also instructing potential tyrants in how to destroy 
republican life. Yet there can hardly be any doubt that Machiavelli preferred republics to 
monarchies, tyrannical or nontyrannical. He loathed oppression NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 315 
which is not in the service of the well-being of the people and hence of effective government, 
especially of impartial and unsqueamish punitive justice. He was a generous man, while knowing 
very well that what passes for generosity in political life is most of the time nothing but shrewd 
calculation, which as such deserves to be commended. In the Discourses he has expressed his 
preference most clearly by his praise of M. Furius Camillus. Camillus had been highly praised by 
Livy as the second Romulus, the second founder of Rome, a most conscientious practitioner of 
religious observances; he even speaks of him as the greatest of all imperatores but he probably 
means by this the greatest of all commanders up to Camillus' time. Machiavelli, however, calls 

Camillus "the most prudent of all Roman captains"; he praises him for both his "goodness" and 
his "virtue," his humanity and integrity, as good and wise-in a word, as a most excellent man. He 
has in mind particularly his equanimity, the fact that he had the same state of mind in good and in 
evil fortune, when he saved Rome from the Gauls and thus earned immortal glory and when he 
was condemned to exile. Machiavelli traces Camillus' superiority to the whims of fortune to his 
superior knowledge of the world. In spite of his extraordinary merits Camillus was condemned to 
exile. Why he was so condemned, Machiavelli discusses in a special chapter (III 23). On the 
basis of Livy he enumerates three reasons. But, if I am not mistaken, Livy never mentions these 
three reasons together as causes of Camillus' exile. In fact Machiavelli follows here not Livy but 
Plutarch. But he makes this characteristic change: he assigns the central place to the fact that in 
his triumph Camillus had his triumphal chariot drawn by four white horses; therefore the people 
said that through pride he had wished to equal the sun-god or, as Plutarch has it, Jupiter (Livy 
says: Jupiter et sol). I believe that this rather shocking act of superbia was in Machiavelli's eyes a 
sign of Camillus' magnanimity. Camillus' very pride shows, as Machiavelli surely knew, that 
there is a greatness beyond Camillus' greatness. After all, Camillus was not a founder or 
discoverer of new modes and orders. To state this somewhat differently, Camillus was a Roman 
of the highest dignity and, as Machiavelli has shown most obviously by his comedy La 
Mandragola, human life requires also levity. He there praises Magnifico Lorenzo de'Medici for 
having combined gravity and levity in a quasi-impossible combination-a combination that 
Machiavelli regarded as commendable because in changing from gravity to levity or vice versa, 
one imitates nature, which is changeable. One cannot help wondering how one ought to judge 
reasonably 316  of Machiavelli's teaching as a whole. The simplest way to answer this question 
would seem to be the following. The writer to whom Machiavelli refers and deferred most 
frequently, with the obvious exception of Livy, is Xenophon. But he refers to only two of 
Xenophon's writings: The Education of Cyrus and the Hiero; he takes no notice of Xenophon's 
Socratic writings, that is, of the other pole of Xenophon's moral universe: Socrates. Half of 
Xenophon, in Xenophon's view the better half, is suppressed by Machiavelli. One can safely say 
that there is no moral or political phenomenon that Machiavelli knew or for whose discovery he 
is famous that was not perfectly known to Xenophon, to say nothing of Plato or Aristotle. It is 
true that in Machiavelli everything appears in a new light, but this is due, not to an enlargement 
of the horizon, but to a narrowing of it. Many modern discoveries regarding man have this 
character. Machiavelli has often been compared with the Sophists. Machiavelli says nothing of 
the Sophists or of the men commonly known as Sophists. Yet he says something on this subject, 
if indirectly, in his Life of Castruccio Castracani, a very charming little work, containing an 
idealized description of a fourteenth century condottiere or tyrant. At the end of that work he 
records a number of witty sayings said or listened to by Castruccio. Almost all those sayings 
have been borrowed by Machiavelli from Diogenes Laertius' Lives of the Famous Philosophers. 
Machiavelli changes the sayings in some cases in order to make them suitable to Castruccio. In 
Diogenes, an ancient philosopher is recorded as having said that he would wish to die like 
Socrates; Machiavelli makes this Castruccio's saying, yet he would wish to die like Caesar. Most 

of the sayings recorded in the Castruccio stem from Aristippus and Diogenes the Cynic. The 
references to Aristippus and Diogenes-men not classified as Sophists-could profitably guide us if 
we are interested in the question of what scholars call Machiavelli's "sources." Toward the end of 
the Nicomachean Ethics Aristotle speaks of what one may call the political philosophy of the 
Sophists. His chief point is that the Sophists identified or almost identified politics with rhetoric. 
In other words, the Sophists believed or tended to believe in the omnipotence of speech. 
Machiavelli surely cannot be accused of that error. Xenophon speaks of his friend Proxenos, who 
commanded a contingent in Cyrus's expedition against the king of Persia and who was a pupil of 
the most famous rhetorician, Gorgias. Xenophon says that Proxenos was an honest man and 
capable to command gentlemen but could not fill his soldiers with NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI 
317 fear of him; he was unable to punish those who were not, gentlemen or even to rebuke them. 
But Xenophon, who was a pupil of Socrates, proved to be a most successful commander 
precisely because he could manage both gentlemen and nongentlemen. Xenophon, the pupil of 
Socrates, was under no delusion about the sternness and harshness of politics, about that 
ingredient of politics which transcends speech. In this important respect Machiavelli and 
Socrates make a common front against the Sophists. 

