THE 
P RI NeE 
Niccolo Machiavelli 
Translated and 
with an Introduction by 
Harvey C. Mansfield 
Second Edition 
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS 
Chicago and London 

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637 
The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London 
10 09 08 07 
© 1985, 1998 by The University of Chicago 
All rights reserved. Second Edition 1998 
Printed ill the Ullited States of America 
7 8 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING -IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Machiavelli, Niccolo, 1469-1527. 
[Principe. English] 
The prince / Niccolo Machiavelli: translated with an 
introduction by Harvey C. Mansfield. - 2nd ed. 
p. 
cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-226-50043-8 (alk. paper).-ISBN 0-226-
50044-6 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
1. Political science-Early works to I800. 
2. Politi­
cal ethics-Early works to 1800. 
l. Title. 
]CI43·M38 
I998 
320.1-dc2I 
9H-5772 
CIP 
@ The paper used in this publication meets the minimum 
requirements of the American National Standard for 
Information Sciences-Permanence of Paper for Printed 
Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1992 

Contents 
Introduction 
A Note on the Translation 
Chronology 
Map 
The Prince 
vii 
xxv 
xxix 
xxxii 
Dedicatory Letter 
3 
I. How Many Are the Kinds of Principalities and in 
What Modes They Are Acquired 
5 
I I. Of Hereditary Principalities 
6 
1fI. Of Mixed Principalities 
7 
IV. Why the Kingdom of Darius Which Alexander Seized 
Did Not Rebel from His Successors after Alexander's 
Death 
16 
V. How Cities or Principalities Which Lived by Their 
Own Laws before They Were Occupied Should Be 
Administered 
20 
V I. Of New Principalities That Are Acquired through 
One's Own Arms and Virtue 
21 
VII 
Of New Principalities That Are Acquired by Others' 
Arms and Fortune 
25 
V III. Of Those Who Have Attained a Principality through 
Crimes 
34 
I X 
Of the Civil Principality 
38 
v 

X. In What Mode the Forces of All Principalities Should 
Be Measured 
42 
XI. Of Ecclesiastical Principalities 
45 
XII. How Many Kinds of Military There Are and 
Concerning Mercenary Soldiers 
48 
XIII. Of Auxiliary, Mixed, and One's Own Soldiers 
54 
XlV. What a Prince Should Do Regarding the Military 
58 
XV. Of Those Things for Which Men and Especially 
Princes Are Praised or Blamed 
61 
XVI. Of Liberality and Parsimony 
62 
XVII. Of Cruelty and Mercy, and Whether It Is Better to Be 
Loved Than Feared, or the Contrary 
65 
XVIII. In What Mode Faith Should Be Kept by Princes 
68 
XIX. Of Avoiding Contempt and Hatred 
71 
XX. Whether Fortresses and Many Other Things Which 
Are Made and Done by Princes Every Day Are Useful 
or Useless 
83 
XXI. What a Prince Should Do to Be Held in Esteem 
87 
XXII. Of Those Whom Princes Have as Secretaries 
92 
XXIII. In What Mode Flatterers Are to Be Avoided 
93 
XXIV. Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost Their States 
96 
XXv. How Much Fortune Can Do in Human Affairs, and in 
What Mode It May Be Opposed 
98 
XXVI. Exhortation to Seize Italy and to Free Her from the 
Barbarians 
101 
Appendix 
Machiavelli's Letter of December 10, 15 I 3 
107 
Glossary 
113 
Bibliography 
141 
Index of Proper Names 
145 
vi 

Introduction 
Anyone who picks up Machiavelli's The Prince holds in his 
hands the most famous book on politics ever written. Its 
closest rival might be Plato's Republic, but that book dis­
cusses politics in the context of things above politics, and 
politics turns out to have a limited and subordinate place. In 
The Prince Machiavelli also discusses politics in relation to 
things outside politics, as we shall see, but his conclusion is 
very different. Politics according to him is not limited by 
things above it, and things normally taken to be outside 
politics-the "givens" in any political situation-turn out 
to be much more under the control of politics than politi­
cians, peoples, and philosophers have hitherto assumed. 
Machiavelli's The Prince, then, is the most famous book on 
politics when politics is thought to be carried on for its own 
sake, unlimited by anything above it. The renown of The 
Prince is precisely to have been the first and the best book 
to argue that politics has and should have its own rules and 
should not accept rules of any kind or from any source 
where the object is not to win or prevail over others. The 
Prince is briefer and pithier than Machiavelli's other major 
work, Discourses on Livy, for The Prince is addressed to Lo­
renzo de' Medici, a prince like the busy executive of our 
day who has little time for reading. So The Prince with its 
political advice to an active politician that politics should not 
be limited by anything not political, is by far more famous 
than the Discourses on Livy. 
We cannot, however, agree that The Prince is the most 
famous book on politics without immediately correcting 
this to say that it is the most infamous. It is famous for its 
infamy, for recommending the kind of politics that ever 
since has been called Machiavellian. The essence of this 
politics is that "you can get away with murder": that no 
divine sanction, or degradation of soul, or twinge of con­
science will come to punish you. If you succeed, you will 
Vll 

1111\ l'V 'II have to face the infamy of murder, because when 
"11It'1l acquire who can acquire, they will be praised or not 
blamed" (Chapter 3). Those criminals who are infamous 
have merely been on the losing side. Machiavelli and Machi­
avellian politics are famous or infamous for their willing­
ness to brave infamy. 
Yet it must be reported that the prevailing view 
among scholars of Machiavelli is that he was not an evil man 
who taught evil doctrines, and that he does not deserve his 
infamy. With a view to his preference for republics over 
principalities (more evident in Discourses on Livy than in 
The Prince, but not absent in the latter), they cannot believe 
he was an apologist for tyranny; or, impressed by the sud­
den burst of Italian patriotism in the last chapter of The 
Prince, they forgive him for the sardonic observations 
which are not fully consistent with this generous feeling but 
are thought to give it a certain piquancy (this is the opinion 
of an earlier generation of scholars); or, on the basis of 
Machiavelli's saying in Chapter 15 that we should take our 
bearings from "what is done" rather than from "what 
should be done," they conclude that he was a forerunner of 
modern political science, which is not an evil thing because 
it merely tells us what happens without passing judgment. 
In sum, the prevailing view of the scholars offers excuses 
for Machiavelli: he was a republican, a patriot, or a scientist, 
and therefore, in explicit contradiction to the reaction of 
most people to Machiavelli as soon as they hear of his doc­
trines, Machiavelli was not" Machiavellian." 
The reader can form his own judgment of these ex­
cuses for Machiavelli. I do not recommend them, chiefly 
because they make Machiavelli less interesting. They trans­
form him into a herald of the future who had the luck 
to sound the tunes we hear so often today-democracy, 
nationalism or self-determination, and science. Instead of 
challenging our favorite beliefs and forcing us to think, 
Machiavelli is enlisted into a chorus of self-congratulation, 
viii 

There is, of course, evidence for the excuses supplied on 
behalf of Machiavelli, and that evidence consists of the ex­
cuses offered by Machiavelli himself. If someone were to 
accuse him of being an apologist for tyranny, he can indeed 
point to a passage in the Discourses on Livy (II 2) where he 
says (rather carefully) that the common good is not ob­
served unless in republics; but if someone else were to ac­
cuse him of supporting republicanism, he could point to the 
same chapter, where he says that the hardest slavery of all is 
to be conquered by a republic. And, while he shows his 
Italian patriotism in Chapter 26 of The Prince by exhorting 
someone to seize Italy in order to free it from the barbarians, 
he also shows his fairmindedness by advising a French king 
in Chapter 3 how he might better invade Italy the next time. 
Lastly, it is true that he sometimes merely reports the evil 
that he sees, while (unnecessarily) deploring it; but at other 
times he urges us to share in that evil and he virtuously 
condemns half-hearted immoralists. Although he was an 
exceedingly bold writer who seems to have deliberately 
courted an evil reputation, he was nonetheless not so bold as 
to fail to provide excuses, or prudent reservations, for his 
boldest statements. Since I have spoken at length on this 
point in another place, and will not hesitate to mention the 
work of Leo Strauss, it is not necessary to explain it further 
here. 
What is at issue in the question of whether Machiavelli 
was "Machiavellian"? To see that a matter of the highest 
importance is involved we must not rest satisfied with ei­
ther scholarly excuses or moral frowns. For the matter at 
issue is the character of the rules by which we reward 
human beings with fame or condemn them with infamy, 
the very status of morality. Machiavelli does not make it 
clear at first that this grave question is his subject. In the 
Dedicatory Letter he approaches Lorenzo de' Medici with 
hat in one hand and The Prince in the other. Since, he says, 
one must be a prince to know the nature of peoples and a 
IX 

111.111 lit tilt' pc )plc to know the nature of princes, he seems 
Illllfft'l 100t,,,l' 
thc knowledge of princes he does not have 
IlIlt Ill' 'ds. III a 
ordance with this half-serious promise, 
M.1t 1II,Ive IIi speaks about the kinds of principalities in the 
111Jt P,lIt of ,[71e Prince (Chapters I-II) and, as we learn of 
til' IlC 'cssity of conquest, about the kinds of armies in the 
S" 
nd part (Chapters 12-14). But at the same time (to 
make a long story short), we learn that the prince must or 
may lay his foundations on the people (Chapter 9) and that 
while his only object should be the art of war, he must in 
time of peace pay attention to moral qualities in such man­
ner as to be able to use them in time of war (Chapter 14, 
end). 
Thus are we prepared for Machiavelli's clarion call in 
Chapter IS, where he proclaims that he "departs from the 
orders of others" and says why. For moral qualities are 
qualities "held good" by the people; so, if the prince must 
conquer, and wants, like the Medici, to lay his foundation 
on the people, who are the keepers of morality, then a new 
morality consistent with the necessity of conquest must be 
found, and the prince has to be taught anew about the 
nature of peoples by Machiavelli. In departing from the 
orders of others, it appears more fitting to Machiavelli "to 
go directly to the effectual truth of the thing than to the 
imagination of it." Many have imagined republics and prin­
cipalities, but one cannot "let go of what is done for what 
should be done;' because a man who "makes a profession 
of good in all regards" comes to ruin among so many who 
are not good. The prince must learn to be able not to be 
good, and use this ability or not according to necessity. 
This concise statement is most efficacious. It contains a 
fundamental assault on all morality and political science, 
both Christian and classical, as understood in Machiavelli's 
time. Morality had meant not only doing the right action, 
but also doing it for the right reason or for the love of God. 
Thus, to be good was thought to require "a profession of 
x 

good" in which the motive for doing good was explained; 
otherwise, morality would go no deeper than outward con­
formity to law, or even to superior force, and could not be 
distinguished from it. But professions of good could not 
accompany moral actions in isolation from each other; they 
would have to be elaborated so that moral actions would be 
consistent with each other and the life of a moral person 
would form a whole. Such elaboration requires an effort of 
imagination, since the consistency we see tells us only of the 
presence of outward conformity, and the elaboration ex­
tends over a society, because it is difficult to live a moral life 
by oneself; hence morality requires the construction of an 
imagined republic or principality, such as Plato's Republic 
or St. Augustine's City of God. 
When Machiavelli denies that imagined republics and 
principalities "exist in truth," and declares that the truth in 
these or all matters is the effectual truth, he says that no 
moral rules exist, not made by men, which men must 
abide by. The rules or laws that exist are those made by 
governments or other powers acting under necessity, and 
they must be obeyed out of the same necessity. Whatever 
is necessary may be called just and reasonable, but justice is 
no more reasonable than what a person's prudence tells 
him he must acquire for himself, or must submit to, be­
cause men cannot afford justice in any sense that tran­
scends their own preservation. Machiavelli did not at­
tempt (as did Hobbes) to formulate a new definition of 
justice based on self-preservation. Instead, he showed 
what he meant by not including justice among the eleven 
pairs of moral qualities that he lists in Chapter 15. He does 
mention justice in Chapter 21 as a calculation of what a 
weaker party might expect from a prince whom it has sup­
ported in war, but even this little is contradicted by what 
Machiavelli says about keeping faith in Chapter 18 and 
about betraying one's old supporters in Chapter 20. He 
also brings up justice as something identical with necessity 
xi 

in 
hapter 26. But, what is most striking, he never men­
tions-not in The Prince, or in any of his works-natural 
justice or natural law, the two conceptions of justice in the 
classical and medieval tradition that had been handed 
down to his time and that could be found in the writings 
on this subject of all his contemporaries. The grave issue 
raised by the dispute whether Machiavelli was truly 
"Machiavellian" is this: does justice exist by nature or by 
God, or is it the convenience of the prince (government)? 
"So let a prince win and maintain a state: the means will 
always be judged honorable, and will be praised by every­
one" (Chapter IS). Reputation, then, is outward confor­
mity to successful human force and has no reference to 
moral rules that the government might find inconvenient. 
If there is no natural justice, perhaps Machiavelli can 
teach the prince how to rule in its absence-but with a view 
to the fact that men "profess" it. It does not follow of ne­
cessity that because no natural justice exists, princes can rule 
successfully without it. Governments might be as unsuc­
cessful in making and keeping conquests as in living up 
to natural justice; indeed, the traditional proponents of nat­
ural justice, when less confident of their own cause, had 
pointed to the uncertainty of gain, to the happy inconstancy 
of fortune, as an argument against determined wickedness. 
But Machiavelli thinks it possible to "learn" to be able not 
to be good. For each of the difficulties of gaining and keep­
ing, even and especially for the fickleness of fortune, he has 
a "remedy," to use his frequent expression. Since nature or 
God does not support human justice, men are in need of a 
remedy; and the remedy is the prince, especially the new 
prince. Why must the new prince be preferred? 
In the heading to the first chapter of The Prince we see 
that the kinds of principalities are to be discussed together 
with the ways in which they are acquired, and then in the 
chapter itself we find more than this, that principalities are 
classified into kinds by the ways in which they are acquired. 
XlI 

''Acquisition,'' an economic term, is Machiavelli's word 
for "conquest"; and acquisition determines the classifica­
tions of governments, not their ends or structures, as Plato 
and Aristotle had thought. How is acquisition related to the 
problem of justice? 
Justice requires a modest complement of external 
goods, the equipment of virtue in Aristotle's phrase, to 
keep the wolf from the door and to provide for moral per­
sons a certain decent distance from necessities in the face 
of which morality might falter or even fail. For how can 
one distribute justly without something to distribute? But, 
then, where is one to get this modest complement? The easy 
way is by inheritance. In Chapter 2, Machiavelli considers 
hereditary principalities, in which a person falls heir to ev­
erything he needs, especially the political power to protect 
what he has. The hereditary prince, the man who has every­
thing, is called the "natural prince," as if to suggest that our 
grandest and most comprehensive inheritance is what we 
get from nature. But when the hereditary prince looks upon 
his inheritance-and when we, generalizing from his case, 
add up everything we inherit-is it adequate? 
The difficulty with hereditary principalities is indi­
cated at the end of Chapter 2, where Machiavelli admits that 
hereditary princes will have to change but claims that 
change will not be disruptive because it can be gradual and 
continuous. He compares each prince's own construction 
to building a house that is added on to a row of houses: you 
may not inherit all you need, but you inherit a firm support 
and an easy start in what you must acquire. But clearly a 
row of houses so built over generations presupposes that 
the first house was built without existing support and with­
out an easy start. Inheritance presupposes an original ac­
quisition made without a previous inheritance. And in the 
original acquisition, full attention to the niceties of justice 
may unfortunately not be possible. One may congratulate 
an American citizen for all the advantages to which he is 
Xlll 

\IIttll, 11111 
11.11 Itl ,lit Il.l\ty necessities that prepared this 
1It1111111111 I 
,Ite 
1I1111sh expelled, Indians defrauded, 
hl" 
III II \ d. 
/VI 1\ 1",IVllli ild >rillS us in the third chapter, accord-
1111 I I tll.Il "'I \ tI Y i I is a very natural and ordinary thing to 
.II II,' 'II .It II 1I11\'!." In the space of a few pages, "natural" has 
dllHnl III III 
'a ning from hereditary to acquisitive. Or can 
Wl' Ill' consoled by reference to Machiavelli's republican­
'À1I1. !lOl so prominent in The Prince, with the thought that 
.1 -quisitiveness may be natural to princes but is not natural 
to republics? But in Chapter 3 Machiavelli praises the suc­
cessful acquisitiveness of the "Romans," that is, the Roman 
republic, by comparison to the imprudence of the king of 
France. At the time Machiavelli is referring to, the Romans 
were not weak and vulnerable as they were at their incep­
tion; they had grown powerful and were still expanding. 
Even when they had enough empire to provide an inheri­
tance for their citizens, they went on acquiring. Was this 
reasonable? It was, because the haves of this world cannot 
quietly inherit what is coming to them; lest they be treated 
now as they once treated others, they must keep an eye on 
the have-nots. To keep a step ahead of the have-nots the 
haves must think and behave like have-nots. They certainly 
cannot afford justice to the have-nots, nor can they waste 
time or money on sympathy. 
In the Dedicatory Letter Machiavelli presents himself 
to Lorenzo as a have-not, "from a low and mean state"; and 
one thing he lacks besides honorable employment, we 
learn, is a unified fatherland. Italy is weak and divided. 
Then should we say that acquisitiveness is justified for ital­
ians of Machiavelli's time, including him? As we have 
noted, Machiavelli does not seem to accept this justification 
because, still in Chapter 3, he advises a French king how to 
correct the errors he had made in his invasion of Italy. 
Besides, was Machiavelli's fatherland Italy or was it Flor­
ence? In Chapter 15 he refers to "our language," meaning 
XIV 

Tuscan, and in Chapter 20 to "our ancients," meaning Flor­
entines. But does it matter whether Machiavelli was essen­
tially an Italian or a Florentine patriot? Anyone's fatherland 
is defined by an original acquisition, a conquest, and hence 
is always subject to redefinition of the same kind. To be 
devoted to one's native country at the expense of foreign­
ers is no more justified than to be devoted to one's city at 
the expense of fellow countrymen, or to one's family at the 
expense of fellow city-dwellers, or, to adapt a Machiavel­
lian remark in Chapter 17, to one's patrimony at the expense 
of one's father. So to "unify" one's fatherland means to 
treat it as a conquered territory-conquered by a king or 
republic from within; and Machiavelli's advice to the French 
king on how to hold his conquests in Italy was also advice to 
Lorenzo on how to unify Italy. It appears that, in acquiring, 
the new prince acquires for himself 
What are the qualities of the new prince? What must 
he do? First, as we have seen, he should rise from private or 
unprivileged status; he should not have an inheritance, or if 
he has, he should not rely on it. He should owe nothing to 
anyone or anything, for having debts of gratitude would 
make him dependent on others, in the widest sense depen­
dent on fortune. It might seem that the new prince depends 
at least on the character of the country he conquers, and 
Machiavelli says at the end of Chapter 4 that Alexander had 
no trouble in holding Asia because it had been accustomed 
to the government of one lord. But then in Chapter 5 he 
shows how this limitation can be overcome. A prince who 
conquers a city used to living in freedom need not respect its 
inherited liberties; he can and should destroy such cities or 
else rule them personally. Fortune supplies the prince with 
nothing more than opportunity, as when Moses found the 
people of Israel enslaved by the Egyptians, Romulus found 
himself exposed at birth, Cyrus found the Persians discon­
tented with the empire of the Medes, and Theseus found 
the Athenians dispersed (Chapter 6). These famous founders 
xv 

had the virtue to recognize the opportunity that fortune 
offered to them-opportunity for them, harsh necessity to 
their peoples. Instead of dispersing the inhabitants of a free 
city (Chapter S), the prince is lucky enough to find them 
dispersed (Chapter 6). This suggests that the prince could 
go so far as to make his own opportunity by creating a 
situation of necessity in which no one's inherited goods 
remain to him and everything is owed to you, the new 
prince. When a new prince comes to power, should he be 
grateful to those who helped him get power and rely on 
them? Indeed not. A new prince has "lukewarm defenders" 
in his friends and allies, because they expect benefits from 
him; as we have seen, it is much better to conciliate his 
former enemies who feared losing everything (compare 
Chapters 6 and 20). 
Thus, the new prince has virtue that enables him to 
overcome his dependence on inheritance in the widest 
sense, including custom, nature, and fortune, and that shows 
him how to arrange it that others depend on him and his 
virtue (Chapters 9, 24). But if virtue is to do all this, it must 
have a new meaning. Instead of cooperating with nature or 
God, as in the various classical and Christian conceptions, 
virtue must be taught to be acquisitive on its own. Machia­
velli teaches the new meaning of virtue by showing us both 
the new and the old meanings. In a famous passage on the 
successful criminal Agathocles in Chapter 8, he says "one 
cannot call it virtue to kill one's citizens, betray one's friends, 
to be without faith, without mercy, without religion." Yet 
in the very next sentence Machiavelli proceeds to speak of 
"the virtue of Agathocles." 
The prince, we have seen in Chapter IS, must "learn 
to be able not to be good, and to use this and not use it 
according to necessity." Machiavelli supplies this knowl­
edge in Chapters 16 to 18. First, with superb calm, he 
delivers home-truths concerning the moral virtue of liber­
ality. It is no use being liberal (or generous) unless it is 
XVI 

noticed, so that you are "held liberal" or get a name for 
liberality. But a prince cannot be held liberal by being liber­
al, because he would have to be liberal to a few by burden­
ing the many with taxes; the many would be offended, the 
prince would have to retrench, and he would soon get a 
name for stinginess. The right way to get a reputation for 
liberality is to begin by not caring about having a reputation 
for stinginess. When the people see that the prince gets 
the job done without burdening them, they will in time 
consider him liberal to them and stingy only to the few to 
whom he gives nothing. In the event, "liberality" comes to 
mean taking little rather than giving much. 
As regards cruelty and mercy, in Chapter 8 Machi­
avelli made a distinction between cruelties well used and 
badly used; well-used cruelties are done once, for self­
defense, and not continued but turned to the benefit of 
one's subjects, and badly used ones continue and increase. 
In Chapter 17, however, he does not mention this distinc­
tion but rather speaks only of using mercy badly. Mercy is 
badly used when, like the Florentine people in a certain 
instance, one seeks to avoid a reputation for cruelty and thus 
allows disorders to continue which might be stopped with a 
very few examples of cruelty. Disorders harm everybody; 
executions harm only the few or the one who is executed. 
As the prince may gain a name for liberality by taking little, 
so he may be held merciful by not being cruel too often. 
Machiavelli's new prince arranges the obligation of his 
subjects to himself in a manner rather like that of the Chris­
tian God, in the eye of whom all are guilty by original sin; 
hence God's mercy appears less as the granting of benefits 
than as the remission of punishment. With this thought in 
mind, the reader will not be surprised that Machiavelli goes 
on to discuss whether it is better for the prince to be loved or 
feared. It would be best to be both loved and feared, but, 
when necessity forces a choice, it is better to be feared, 
because men love at their convenience but they fear at the 
XVll 

'ollv'ni nce of the prince. Friends may fail you, but the 
dread of punishment will never forsake you. If the prince 
avoids making himself hated, which he can do by abstaining 
from the property of others, "because men forget the death 
of a father more quickly than the loss of a patrimony," he 
will again have subjects obligated to him for what he does 
not do to them rather than for benefits he provides. 
It is laudable for a prince to keep faith, Machiavelli says 
in Chapter I 8, but princes who have done great things have 
done them by deceit and betrayal. The prince must learn 
how to use the beast in man, or rather the beasts; for man is 
an animal who can be many animals, and he must know 
how to be a fox as well as a lion. Men will not keep faith 
with you; how can you keep it with them? Politics, Ma­
chiavelli seems to say, as much as consists in breaking 
promises, for circumstances change and new necessities 
arise that make it impossible to hold to one's word. The 
only question is, can one get away with breaking one's 
promises? Machiavelli's answer is a confident yes. He 
broadens the discussion, speaking of five moral qualities, 
especially religion; he says that men judge by appearances 
and that when one judges by appearances, "one looks to the 
end." The end is the outcome or the effect, and if a prince 
wins and maintains a state, the means will always be judged 
honorable. Since Machiavelli has just emphasized the 
prince's need to appear religious, we may compare the 
people's attitude toward a successful prince with their belief 
in divine providence. As people assume that the outcome of 
events in the world is determined by God's providence, so 
they conclude that the means chosen by God cannot have 
been unworthy. Machiavelli's thought here is both a subtle 
attack on the notion of divine providence and a subtle 
appreciation of it, insofar as the prince can appropriate it to 
his own use. 
It is not easy to state exactly what virtue is, according 
to Machiavelli. Clearly he does not leave virtue as it was in 
XVlll 

the classical or Christian tradition, nor does he imitate any 
other writer of his time. Virtue in his new meaning seems to 
be a prudent or well-taught combination of vice and virtue 
in the old meaning. Virtue for him is not a mean between 
two extremes of vice, as is moral virtue for Aristotle. As we 
have seen, in Chapter 15 eleven virtues (the same number as 
Aristotle's, though not all of them the same virtues) are 
paired with eleven vices. From this we might conclude that 
virtue does not shine of itself, as when it is done for its own 
sake. Rather, virtue is as it takes effect, its truth is its effectual 
truth; and it is effectual only when it is seen in contrast to its 
opposite. Liberality, mercy, and love are impressive only 
when one expects stinginess (or rapacity), cruelty, and fear. 
This contrast makes virtue apparent and enables the prince 
to gain a reputation for virtue. If this is so, then the new 
meaning Machiavelli gives to virtue, a meaning which 
makes use of vice, must not entirely replace but somehow 
continue to coexist with the old meaning, according to 
which virtue is shocked by vice. 
A third quality of the new prince is that he must make 
his own foundations. Although to be acquisitive means to 
be acquisitive for oneself, the prince cannot do everything 
with his own hands: he needs help from others. But in 
seeking help he must take account of the "two diverse hu­
mors" to be found in every city-the people, who desire 
not to be commanded or oppressed by the great, and the 
great, who desire to command and oppress the people 
(Chapter 9). Of these two humors, the prince should 
choose the people. The people are easier to satisfy, too inert 
to move against him, and too numerous to kill, whereas the 
great regard themselves as his equals, are ready and able to 
conspire against him, and are replaceable. 
The prince, then, should ally with the people against 
the aristocracy; but how should he get their support? Ma­
chiavelli gives an example in the conduct of Cesare Borgia, 
whom he praises for the foundations he laid (Chapter 7). 
xix 

When Cesare had conquered the province of Romagna, 
he installed "Remirro de Orco" (actually a Spaniard, Don 
Remiro de Lorqua) to carry out a purge of the unruly lords 
there. Then, because Cesare thought Remirro's authority 
might be excessive, and his exercise of it might become 
hateful-in short, because Remirro had served his pur­
pose-he purged the purger and one day had Remirro 
displayed in the piazza at Cesena in two pieces. This spec­
tacle left the people "at once satisfied and stupefied"; 
and Cesare set up a more constitutional government in 
Romagna. The lesson: constitutional government is pos­
sible but only after an unconstitutional beginning. 
In Chapter 9 Machiavelli discusses the "civil prin­
cipality," which is gained through the favor of the people, 
and gives as example Nabis, "prince" of the Spartans, 
whom he calls a tyrant in the Discourses on Livy because of 
the crimes Nabis committed against his rivals. In Chapter 8 
Machiavelli considers the principality 
that is attained 
through crimes, and cites Agathocles and Oliverotto, both 
of whom were very popular despite their crimes. As one 
ponders these two chapters, it becomes more and more 
difficult to find a difference between gaining a principality 
through crimes and through the favor of the people. Surely 
Cesare Borgia, Agathocles, and Nabis seemed to have fol­
lowed the same policy of pleasing the people by cutting up 
the great. Finally, in Chapter 19, Machiavelli reveals that the 
prince need not have the support of the people after all. 
Even if he is hated by the people (since in fact he cannot fail 
to be hated by someone), he can, like the Roman emperor 
Severus, make his foundation with his soldiers (see also 
Chapter 20). Severus had such virtue, Machiavelli says, 
with an unobtrusive comparison to Cesare Borgia in 
Chapter 7, that he "stupefied" the people and "satisfied" 
the soldiers. 
Fourth, the new prince has his own arms, and does not 
rely on mercenary or auxiliary armies. Machiavelli omits a 
xx 

discussion of the laws a prince should establish, in contrast 
to the tradition of political science, because, he says, "there 
cannot be good laws where there are not good arms, and 
where there are good arms there must be good laws" 
(Chapter 12). He speaks of the prince's arms in Chapters 12 
to 14, and in Chapter 14 he proclaims that the prince should 
have no other object or thought but the art of war. He must 
be armed, since it is quite unreasonable for one who is 
armed to obey one who is unarmed. With this short remark 
Machiavelli seems to dismiss the fundamental principle of 
classical political science, the rule of the wise, not to men­
tion the Christian promise that the meek shall inherit the 
earth. 
Machiavelli does not mean that those with the most 
bodily force always win, for he broadens the art of war to 
include the acquisition as well as the use of arms. A prince 
who has no army but has the art of war will prevail over one 
with an army but without the art. Thus, to be armed means 
to know the art of war, to exercise it in time of peace, and to 
have read histories about great captains of the past. In this 
regard Machiavelli mentions Xenophon's "Life of Cyrus," as 
he calls it (actually "The Education of Cyrus"), the first and 
best work in the literature of "mirrors of princes" to which 
The Prince belongs. But he calls it a history, not a mirror of 
princes, and says that it inspired the Roman general Scipio, 
whom he criticizes in Chapter 17 for excessive mercy. Not 
books of imaginary republics and principalities, or treatises 
on law, but histories of war, are recommended reading for 
the prince. 
Last, the new prince with his own arms is his own 
master. 
The deeper 
meaning of Machiavelli's slogan, 
"one's own arms;' is religious, or rather, antireligious. If 
man is obligated to God as his creature, then man's own 
necessities are subordinate or even irrelevant to his most 
pressing duties. It would not matter if he could not afford 
justice: God commandy
r(Thus Machiavelli must look at 
XXI 

III • new prince who is also a prophet, above all at Moses. 
Moses was a "mere executor of things that had been ordered 
ror him by God" (Chapter 6); hence he should be admired 
¿ r the grace that made him worthy of speaking with God. 
Or should it be said, as Machiavelli says in Chapter 26, 
that Moses had "virtue," the virtue that makes a prince 
dependent on no one but himself ? In Chapter 13 Machia­
velli retells the biblical story of David and Goliath to 
illustrate the necessity of one's own arms. When Saul offered 
his arms to David, David refused them, saying, according to 
Machiavelli, that with them he could not give a good ac­
count of himself, and according to the Bible, that the Lord 
"will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine." Machia­
velli also gives David a knife to go with his sling, the knife 
which according to the Bible he took from the fallen Goli­
ath and used to cut off his head. 
Must the new prince-the truly new prince-then be 
his own prophet and make a new religion so as to be his own 
master? The great power of religion can be seen in what 
Moses and David founded, and in what Savonarola nearly 
accomplished in Machiavelli's own time and city. The un­
armed prince whom he disparages in Chapter 6 actually 
disposes of formidable weapons necessary to the art of war. 
The unarmed prophet becomes armed if he uses religion for 
his own purposes rather than God's; and because the prince 
cannot acquire glory for himself without bringing order to 
his principality, using religion for himself is using it to an­
swer human necessities generally. 
The last three chapters of The Prince take up the ques­
tion of how far man can make his own world. What are the 
limits set on Machiavelli's political science (or the "art of 
war") by fortune? At the end of Chapter 24 he blames 
"these princes of ours" who accuse fortune for their trou­
bles and not their own indolence. In quiet times they do not 
take account of the storm to come, but they should-they 
can. They believe that the people will be disgusted by the 
xxii 

arrogance of the foreign conquerors and will call them back. 
But "one should never fall in the belief you can find some­
one to pick you up." Whether successful or not, such a 
defense is base, because it does not depend on you and 
your virtue. 
With this high promise of human capability, Machia­
velli introduces his famous Chapter 25 on fortune. He 
begins it by asking how much of the world is governed by 
fortune and God, and how much by man. He then supposes 
that halfis governed by fortune (forgetting God) and halfby 
man, and he compares fortune to a violent river that can be 
contained with dikes and dams. Turning to particular men, 
he shows that the difficulty in containing fortune lies in the 
inability of one who is impetuous to succeed in quiet times 
or of one who is cautious to succeed in stormy times. Men, 
with their fixed natures and habits, do not vary as the times 
vary, and so they fall under the control of the times, of 
fortune. Men's fixed natures are the special problem, Machi­
avelli indicates; so the problem of overcoming the influence 
of fortune reduces to the problem of overcoming the fixity 
of different human natures. Having a fixed nature is what 
makes one liable to changes of fortune. Pope Julius II suc­
ceeded because the times were in accord with his impetuous 
nature; ifhe had lived longer, he would have come to grief 
Machiavelli blames him for his inflexibility, and so implies 
that neither he nor the rest of us need respect the natures or 
natural inclinations we have been given. 
What is the new meaning of virtue that Machiavelli has 
developed but flexibility according to the times or situation? 
Yet, though one should learn to be both impetuous and 
cautious (these stand for all the other contrary qualities), on 
the whole one should be impetuous. Fortune is a woman 
who "lets herself be won more by the impetuous than by 
those who proceed coldly"; hence she is a friend of the 
young. He makes the politics of the new prince appear 
in the image of rape; impetuous himself, Machiavelli forces 
xxiii 
/ 
/

us to see the question he has raised about the status of 
morality. Whether he says what he appears to say about the 
status of women may be doubted, however. The young men 
who master Lady Fortune come with audacity and leave 
exhausted, but she remains ageless, waiting for the next 
ones. One might go so far as to wonder who is raping 
whom, cautiously as it were, and whether Machiavelli, who 
has personified fortune, can impersonate her in the world of 
modern politics he attempted to create. 
HARVEY C. MANSFIELD 
XXIV 

A Note on the 
Translation 
In this translation I have sought to be as literal and exact as is 
consistent with readable English. Since I am convinced that 
Machiavelli was one of the greatest and subtlest minds to 
whom we have access, I take very seriously the translator's 
obligation to present a writer's thought in his own words, 
insofar as possible. It did not seem to me my duty, therefore, 
to find a rough equivalent to Machiavelli's words in up­
to-date, colloquial prose, and to avoid cognates at all costs. 
For example, I am not embarrassed to translate provincia 
"province" and patria "fatherland" because these English 
words are perfectly intelligible even though they are not the 
expressions we would use today. It is worthwhile trying to 
retain the connotations of those words as Machiavelli used 
them, as well as trying to avoid the connotations of their 
modern equivalents, such as "nation." With this intent in 
translation, I have tried to retain some flavor of Machiavelli's 
style by preserving his favorite expressions and some of his 
crowded sentences and difficult grammar. If the result seems 
a little old-fashioned, so it should. Machiavelli's text will live 
without our help, and it will die if we suffocate it with the 
sort of hospitality that allows it to live with us only on 
our terms. 
As to exactness, I would have liked never to vary the 
translation of such important words as impresa, modo, and 
respetto, but I found it impossible to produce a readable 
version with such a rule. I have kept virtu as "virtue," so that 
readers of this translation can follow and join the dispute 
over the meaning Machiavelli attaches to the word. If his 
use of it sounds strange, as it did when he wrote and still does 
today, then let the reader wonder at finding something 
strange. It is not the translator's business to make everything 
familiar. 
\ xxv 

For some of my departures from consistency, I have 
noted the literal meaning in the notes. I have surely not 
varied the translation merely for the sake of elegance. We 
should not be so certain that we know what Machiavelli's 
key terms or concepts are. Frequently he will use a word or 
phrase several times in close proximity, and such density of 
usage can alert us to the importance of that word in that 
context. His pronouns are often ambiguous in their refer­
ence, and I have sometimes had to make a choice that he 
leaves open. I have indicated in the notes the occasions on 
which Machiavelli departs from his usual familiar "you" and 
addresses a formal or plural "you," a "you" who is asked to 
see, consider, or think something. 
In the spirit of accuracy, I have not provided long 
historical notes to explain Machiavelli's examples. The Prince 
is not a history book. It was written, we believe, in I S 13, 
and it was dedicated, we know, to Lorenzo de' Medici. But 
it was written for the future and addressed above all others, 
including Lorenzo, to "whoever understands it" (Chap­
ter IS). This does not mean that readers who want to un­
derstand The Prince can ignore Machiavelli's examples and 
merely make a list of his sensational assertions. On the con­
trary, those assertions are always modified, sometimes even 
contradicted, by the examples. But the examples will not 
serve as examples if the reader does not look carefully at the 
information Machiavelli gives him. He may miss the point if 
he allows this information to be superseded by the superior 
historical knowledge of our day. 
The text of The Prince has many variations arising 
from the facts that no original manuscript in Machiavelli's 
hand exists and that the work was not published in his 
lifetime under his supervision. Those who want to examine 
the philological scholarship seeking to establish an au­
thoritative text should begin with the article of Quaglio 
listed in the bibliography. I have followed the text of Casel-
XXVI 

la for the most part, adopting some variants where they 
seemed appropriate. 
Such are the principles of this translation. I have prof­
ited from other translations, especially from that of Leo 
Paul S. de Alvarez. If the reader thinks my translation a bad 
one, let him try his own; if he thinks it good, let him learn 
Italian. 
XXVll 
( 

f 
s 
o 
50 .00 150 200 kms 
H,'
. 
o 
50 
.00 .50 m.les 

THE 
PRINCE 

Dedicatory Letter 
Niccolo Machiavelli to the Magnificent Lorenzo de' 
Medici: 
It is customary most of the time for those who desire to 
acquire favor! with a Prince to come to meet him with 
things that they care most for among their own or with 
things that they see please him most. Thus, one sees them2 
many times being presented with horses, arms, cloth of 
gold, precious stones and similar ornaments worthy of 
their greatness. Thus, since I desire to offer myself to your 
Magnificence3 with some testimony of my homage4 to 
you, I have found nothing in my belongings that I care so 
much for and esteem so greatly as the knowledge of the 
actions of great men, learned by me from long experience 
with modern things and a continuous reading of ancient 
ones. Having thought out and examined these things with 
great diligence for a long time, and now reduced them to 
one small volume, I send it to your Magnificence. 
And although I judge this work undeserving of your 
presence, yet I have much confidence that through your 
humanity it may be accepted, considering that no greater 
gift could be made by me than to give you the capacity to be 
able to understand in a very short time all that I have learned 
I. lit.: acquire grace. ''Acquire'' is an economic term that NM often 
uses to refer to noneconomic gain, especially conquest-here, to the favor 
or grace that would seem to be in the gift of a prince. 
2. NM switches from a singular to the plural, a device he uses fre­
quently. 
3. Lorenzo de' Medici (1492-1519). grandson of Lorenzo the 
Magnificent (1449-92); he became duke ofUrbino in 1516. NM had at 
first intended to dedicate The Prince to Giuliano de' Meclici, son ofLorenzo 
the Magnificent and duke of Nemours, who died in 1516. See NM's letter 
to Vettori of December 10,1513, printed in the Appendix. 
4. servitu, a feudal term of submission elsewhere to be translated 
as "servitude." 
3 

and understood in so many years and with so many hard­
ships and dangers for myself I have not ornamented this 
work, nor filled it with fulsome phrases nor with pompous 
and magnificent words, nor with any blandishment or su­
perfluous ornament whatever, with which it is customary 
for many to describe and adorn their things. For I wanted it 
either not to be honored for anything or to please solely for 
the variety of the matter and the gravity of the subject. Nor 
do I want it to be reputed presumption if a man from a 
low and mean state dares to discuss and give rules for the 
governments of princes. For just as those who sketch land­
scapes place themselves down in the plain to consider the 
nature of mountains and high places and to consider the 
nature of low places place themselves high atop mountains, 
similarly, to know well the nature of peoples one needs to be 
prince, and to know well the nature of princes one needs to 
be of the people. 
Therefore, your Magnificence, take this small gift in 
the spiritS with which I send it. If your Magnificence con­
siders and reads it diligently, you will learn from it my 
extreme desire that you arrive at the greatness that fortune 
and your other qualities promise you. And if your Magnifi­
cence will at some time turn your eyes from the summit of 
your height to these low places, you will learn how un­
deservedly I endure a great and continuous malignity of 
fortune. 
5. animo refers to the "spirit" with which human beings defend 
themselves, never to a capacity for self-detachment (anima, "soul," does 
not occur in The Prince). It can also mean "mind" in the sense of "intent;' 
but not in the sense of "intellect." 
4 

OF PRINCIPALITIES 
5I6 
How Many Are the Kinds of 
Principalities and in What Modes 
They Are Acquired 1 
All states,2 all dominions that have held and do hold empire 
over men have been and are either republics or principali­
ties. The principalities are either hereditary, in which the 
bloodline3 of their lord has been their prince for a long time, 
or they are new. The new ones are either altogether new, as 
was Milan to Francesco Sforza,4 or they are like members 
added to the hereditary state of the prince who acquires 
them, as is the kingdom of Naples to the king of Spain.5 
I. Chapter headings of The Prince are in Latin, the language of 
traditional learning and of the Church. 
2. stato means both status (see the Dedicatory Letter) and state, as 
today, but the meanings are more closely connected; stato is the status of 
a person or a group while dominating someone else. Although NM 
sometimes speaks of "the state," he always means someone's state and does 
not refer to an impersonal state. 
3. lit.: blood. 
4. Francesco Sforza ( 140 1-66), the mercenary captain, acquired 
Milan by betraying and overthrowing the Ambrosian Republic of Milan 
in 1450. In 1447 he had laid claim to Milan with a certain respect for its 
previous bloodline, through his marriage to Bianca, daughter of Filippo 
Maria Visconti, then duke of Milan. See NM's account in Florentine 
Histories, V 13, VI 13, 1'(-22. 
5. Ferdinand the Catholic, after agreeing by treaty in 1500 to share 
the kingdom of Naples with Louis XII of France, drove out the French in 
1504 andjoined that kingdom to Spain. 
5 

Dominions so acquired are either accustomed to living un­
der a prince or used to being free; and they are acquired 
either with the arms of others or with one's own, either by 
fortune or by virtue.6 
6. In this translation virtu is consistently rendered "virtue." 
5II6 
Of Hereditary Principalities 
I shall leave out reasoning on republics because I have rea­
soned on them at length another time.! I shall address myself 
only to the principality, and shall proceed by weaving to­
gether the threads mentioned above; and I shall debate how 
these principalities may be governed and maintained. 
I say, then, that in hereditary states accustomed to the 
bloodline2 of their prince the difficulties in maintaining 
them are much less than in new states because it is enough 
only not to depart from the order of his ancestors, and 
then to temporize in the face of accidents. In this way, if 
such a prince is of ordinary industry,3 he will always main-
I. A reference to NM's other chief work, the Discourses on Livy, 
in which he reasons with the use of materials from Livy's history of 
the Roman republic, among other sources. NM does in fact discuss repub­
lics in The Prince (e.g., on "the Romans," Chapter 3 below), but not 
"at length." 
2. lit.: blood. 
3. industria for NM means diligence combined with skill or adroit­
ness which is not necessarily visible. 
6 
1
. 

tain himself in his state unless there is an extraordinary and 
excessive force which deprives him of it; and should he be 
deprived of it, if any mishap whatever befalls the occupier, 
he reacquires it. 
We have in Italy, for example, the duke of Ferrara, 
who, for no other cause than that his line was ancient in that 
... ( .... 
dominion, did not succumb to the attacks of the Venetians 
.\  
)r r(!-* 
in '84, nor to those of Pope Julius in '10.4 For the natural 
lm .. '< 
--
",<> 
prince has less cause and less necessity to offend;s hence It is ..-
fitting that he be more lèd. And if extraordinary vices do 
not make him hated,it is reasonable that he will naturally 
have the good will of his own. 
tn antiq i 
o
'
 
nu 
fth dominion thememeries and causes of innovations 
ange always leaves a dentation6 for 
4. NM speaks of two dukes of Ferrara as if they were one: Ercole 
d'Este ( 143 I-I 505) and his son Alfonso d'Este (1476-1534). Ercole was 
defeated by the Venetians in 1484, and Alfonso was temporarily deprived 
of his principality by Pope Julius in 15 10. 
5. OjJendere is not merely to slight, but to harm so as to cause offense. 
6. A dentation is a toothed wall left on the side of a building so that 
another building may be attached to it. NM's metaphor compares the 
hereditary, or "natural," principality to a row of houses continually added 
to but never finished and, as it were, not begun from the beginning. 
5III6 
Of Mixed Principalities 
But the difficulties reside in the new principality. First, if it 
is not altogether new but like an added member (so that 
taken as a whole it can be called almost mixed), its in­
stability arises in the first place from a natural difficulty that 
7 

exists in all new principalities. This is 1 that men willingly 
change their lords in the belief that they will fare better: this 
belief makes them take up arms against him, in which they 
are deceived because they see later by experience that they 
..,
-: have done worse. That follows from another natural and 
'-lS-" " .... ordinary necessity which requires that one must always 
hv, ..,,,,"\0 _offend those over whom he becomes a new prince, both 
ijk<t.Q. 
with men-at-arms and with infinite other injuries that the 
() 
new acquisition brings in its wake. So you have as enemies 
all those whom you have offended in seizing that principal­
ity, and you cannot keep as friends those who have put you 
there because you cannot satisfy them in the mode they had 
presumed and because you cannot use strong medicines 
against them, since you are obligated to them. For even 
though one may have the strongest of armies, he always, 
needs the support of the inhabitants of a province2 in or­
der to enter it. Through these causes Louis XII of France 
quickly occupied Milan, and quickly lost it; and Ludovico's 
own forces were enough to take it from him the first time.3 
For those people which had opened the gates to him, find­
ing themselves deceived in their opinion and in that future 
good they had presumed for themselves, were unable to 
tolerate the vexations of the new prince. 
It is indeed true that when countries that have rebelled 
are later acquired for the second time, they are lost with 
more difficulty, because the lord, seizing the opportunity 
offered by the rebellion, is less hesitane to secure himself by 
I. lit.: these are. 
2. "Province" refers to a country or region that may be larger or 
smaller than a "state," 
3. Ludovico Sforza, il Moro, was duke of Milan from 1494 until 
Milan was seized from him in September 1499 by Louis XII. He recaptured 
Milan in February 1 500 but was betrayed by his Swiss mercenaries at 
Novara, when the French acquired it in April "for the second time." The 
French then lost Milan in 1512 after the battle of Ravenna to the Holy 
League led by Pope Julius II, "the whole world." 
4. respettivo is also translated as "cautious"; see especially Chapter 2 5, 
8 

punishing offenders, exposing suspects, and providing for 
himself in the weakest spots. So it was that, if one Duke 
Ludovico stirring up a commotion at the borders was 
enough to make France lose Milan the first time, to make 
him then lose it the second time, the whole world had to be 
against him, and his armies eliminated or chased from Italy: 
this arises from the causes given above. Nonetheless, both 
the first and the second times it was taken from him. 
The universal causes of the first have been discussed; it 
remains now to say what were the causes of the second, and 
to see what remedies there were to him, which someone 
in his situation could use so as to maintain himself better in 
his acquisition than France did. Now I say, that such states 
which, when acquired, are added to an ancient state of him 
who acquires them, are either of the same province and 
same language, or not. When they are, they may be held 
with great ease, especially if they are not used to living free; 
and to possess them securely it is enough to have eliminated 
the line of the prince whose dominions they were. For 
when their old conditions are maintained for them in other 
things and there is no disparity of customs, men live qui­
etly-as it may be seen that Burgundy, Brittany, Gascony, 
and Normandy, which have been with France for so long a 
time, have done;5 and although there may be some disparity 
of language, nonetheless the customs are similar, and they 
can easily bear with one another. And whoever acquires 
them, if he wants to hold them, must have two concerns: 
one, that the bloodline of their ancient prince be eliminated; 
the other, not to alter either their laws or their taxes: so that 
in a very short time it becomes one whole body with their 
ancient principality. 
But when one acquires states in a province disparate in 
language, customs, and orders, here are the difficulties, and 
here one needs to have great fortune and great industry to 
5· Burgundy since I477, Brittany 1491, Gascony 1453, and Nor­
mandy I204. 
9 

hold them; and one of the greatest and quickest remedies 
would be for whoever acquires it to go there to live in 
person. This would make that possession more secure and 
more lasting, as the Turk has done in Greece. Despite all the 
other orders observed by him so as to hold that state, if he 
had not gone there to live, it would not have been possible 
for him to hold it. For if you stay there, disorders may be 
seen as they arise, and you can soon remedy them; if you 
are not there, disorders become understood when they are 
great and there is no longer a remedy. Besides this, the 
province is not despoiled by your officials; the subjects are 
satisfied with ready access to the prince, so that they have 
more cause to love him if they want to be good and, if they 
want to be otherwise, more cause to fear him. Whatever 
outsider might want to attack that state has more hesitation 
in doing so; hence, when one lives in it, one can lose it with 
the greatest difficulty. 
The other, better remedy is to send colonies that are, as 
it were, fetters of that state, to one or two places, because it 
is necessary either to do this or to hold them with many 
men-at-arms and infantry. One does not spend much on 
colonies, and without expense of one's own, or with little, 
one may send them and hold them; and one offends only 
those from whom one takes fields and houses in order to 
give them to new inhabitants-who are a very small part of 
that state. And those whom he offends, since they remain 
dispersed and poor, can never harm him, while all the others 
remain on the one hand unhurt, and for this they should be 
quiet; on the other, they are afraid to err from fear that 
what happened to the despoiled might happen to them. I 
conclude that such colonies are not costly, are more faithful, 
and less offensive; and those who are offended can do no 
harm, since they are poor and dispersed as was said. For this 
has to be noted: that men should either be caressed or elimi­
nated, because they avenge themselves for slight offenses 
but cannot do so for grave ones; so the offense one does to a 
IO 

man should be such that one does not fear revenge for it. 
But when one holds a state with men-at-arms in place of 
colonies, one spends much more since one has to consume 
all the income of that state in guarding it. So the acquisition 
turns to loss, and one offends much more because one harms 
the whole state as one's army moves around for lodgings. 
Everyone feels this hardship, and each becomes one's en­
emy: and these are enemies that can harm one since they 
remain, though defeated, in their homes. From every side, 
therefore, keeping guard in this way is as useless as keeping 
guard by means of colonies is useful. 
Whoever is in a province that is disparate, as was said, 
should also make himself head and defender of the neigh­
boring lesser powers, and contrive to weaken the powerful 
in that province and to take care that through some accident 
a foreigner as powerful as he does not enter there. And it will 
always turn out that a foreigner will be brought in by those 
in the province who are malcontent either because of too 
much ambition or out of fear, as once the Aetolians were 
seen to bring the Romans into Greece; and in every other 
province they entered, they were brought in by its inhabi­
tants. And the order of things is such that as soon as a 
powerful foreigner enters a province, all those in it who are 
less powerful adhere to him, moved by the envy they have 
against whoever has held power over them. So with respect 
to these lesser powers, he has no trouble in gaining them, 
because all together they quickly and willingly make one 
mass with the state that he has acquired there. He has only to 
worry that these lesser powers may get too much force and 
too much authority; and with his forces and their support he 
can easily put down those who are powerful, so as to remain 
arbiter of that province in everything. And whoever does 
not conduct this policy well will soon lose what he has 
acquired, and while he holds it, will have infinite difficulties 
and vexations within it. 
The Romans observed these policies well in the 
II 

provinces they took. They sent out colonies, indulged the 
lesser powers without increasing their power, put down 
the powerful, and did not allow foreign powers to gain 
reputation there. And I want the province of Greece alone 
to suffice as an example. The Achaeans and the Aetolians 
were indulged by the Romans; the kingdom of the Mace­
donians was brought down and Antiochus was chased out. 
N or did the merits of the Achaeans or those of the Aetolians 
make the Romans permit them to increase any state of 
theirs; nor did the persuasions of Philip ever induce them to 
be his friends without putting him down; nor could the 
power of Antiochus make them consent to his holding any 
state in that province. For the Romans did in these cases 
what all wise princes should do: they not only have to have 
regard for present troubles6 but also for future ones, and 
they have to avoid these with all their industry because, 
when one foresees from afar, one can easily find a remedy 
for them but when you wait until they come close to you, 
the medicine is not in time because the disease has become 
incurable. And it happens with this as the physicians say of 
consumption, that in the beginning of the illness it is easy to 
cure and difficult to recognize, but in the progress of time, 
when it has not been recognized and treated in the begin­
ning, it becomes easy to recognize and difficult to cure. So it 
happens in affairs of state, because when one recognizes 
from afar the evils that arise in a state (which is not given but 
to one who is prudent), they are soon healed; but when they 
are left to grow because they were not recognized, to the 
point that everyone recognizes them, there is no longer any 
remedy for them. 
Thus, the Romans, seeing inconveniences from afar, 
always found remedies for them and never allowed them to 
continue so as to escape a war, because they knew that war 
may not be avoided but is deferred to the advantage of 
6. lit.: scandals. 
12 

others. So they decided to make war with Philip and Anti­
ochus in Greece in order not to have to do so in Italy; and 
they could have avoided both one and the other for a time, 
but they did not want to. Nor did that saying ever please 
them which is every day in the mouths of the wise men of 
our times-to enjoy the benefit of time-but rather, they 
enjoyed the benefit of their virtue and prudence. For time 
sweeps everything before it and can bring with it good as 
well as evil and evil as well as good. 
But let us return to France and examine whether he 
has done any of the things spoken of I will speak of Louis 
and not of Charles,7 as the steps of the former, because he 
held his possession in Italy longer, may be seen better. And 
youS will see that he did the contrary of the things that 
should be done to hold a state in a disparate province. 
King Louis was brought into Italy by the ambition of 
the Venetians, who wanted to gain half the state of Lom­
bardy for themselves by his coming. I do not want to blame 
the course adopted by the king; for since he wanted to begin 
by gaining a foothold in Italy, and having no friends in this 
province, indeed, having all doors closed to him because of 
the conduct of King Charles, he was forced to take what­
ever friendships he could get. And having firmly adopted 
this course he would have succeeded if in managing other 
things he had not made some error. Thus, when he had 
acquired Lombardy, the king regained quickly the reputa­
tion that Charles had taken from him: Genoa yielded, and 
the Florentines became his friends; the marquis of Mantua, 
duke of Ferrara, Bentivoglio, Madonna of Forli, the lords of 
Faenza, of Pesaro, of Rimini, of Camerino, of Piombino, 
the Luccans, Pisans, and Sienese-everyone came to meet 
him so as to become his friend. And then the Venetians 
7. Of Louis XII, not of Charles VIII; the latter's invasion ofItaly in 
September 1494 lasted only until October 1495. 
8. The formal or plural you. 
13 

could consider the temerity of the course they had adopted: 
to acquire two lands in Lombardy they made the king lord 
of two-thirds90f Italy. 
One may now consider with how little difficulty the 
king could have maintained his reputation in Italy if he had 
observed the rules written above and had held secure and 
defended all those friends of his, who, because they were a 
great number, weak, and fearful-some of the Church, 
some of the Venetians-were always under a necessity to 
stay with him; and by their means he could always have 
secured himself easily against whoever remained great 
among us. But no sooner was he in Milan than he did the 
contrary by giving aid to Pope Alexander so that the pope 
might seize the Romagna. Nor did he notice that with this 
decision he was weakening himself, stripping himself of his 
friends and those who had jumped into his lap, while mak­
ing the Church great by adding so much temporal greatness 
to the spiritual one that gives it so much authority. And 
having made the first error, he was compelled to continue, 
so that to put an end to the ambition of Alexander, and to 
prevent his becoming lord of Tuscany, he was compelled to 
come into Italy. It was not enough for him to have made the 
Church great and to have stripped himself of his friends, but 
because he wanted the kingdom of Naples, he divided it 
with the king of Spain. Whereas at first he was the arbiter 
of Italy, he brought in a companion so that the ambitious 
ones in that province and those malcontent with him had 
somewhere to turn; and whereas he could have left in that 
kingdom 10 a king who was his pensioner, he threw him out 
so as to bring in one who could expel him. 
And truly it is a very natural and ordinary thing to 
desire to acquire, and always, when men do it who can, 
they will be praised or not blamed; but when they cannot, 
9. Some manuscripts say one-third. 
10. The kingdom of Naples, which had been held by Frederick 
of Aragon. 
14 

and wish to do it anyway, here lie the error and the blame. 
Thus, if France could have attacked Naples with his own 
forces, he should have done so; if he could not, he should 
not have divided Naples. And if the division of Lombardy 
he made with the Venetians deserves excuse because with it 
France gained a foothold in Italy, this other one deserves 
blame because it was not excused by that necessity. 
So then Louis had made these five errors: he had elimi­
nated the lesser powers; increased the power of a power in 
Italy; brought in a very powerful foreigner; did not come to 
live there; did not put colonies there. Yet if he had lived, 
these errors could not have hurt him if he had not made a 
sixth: depriving the Venetians of their state. For if he had 
not made the Church great or brought Spain into Italy, 
it would indeed have been reasonable and necessary to 
put down the Venetians. But when he had adopted these 
courses first, he should never have consented to their ruin, 
for while they were powerful they would always have kept 
others away from a campaign in Lombardy, whether it was 
because the Venetians would not have consented to them 
unless they themselves were to become its lords, or because 
the others would not have wanted to take Lombardy from 
France in order to give it to the Venetians, and they would 
not have had the spirit to go and attack both of them. And if 
someone should say: King Louis ceded Romagna to Alex­
ander and the Kingdom II to Spain to avoid a war, I reply 
with the reasons given above: that a disorder should never 
be allowed to continue so as to avoid a war, because that 
is not to avoid it but to defer it to your disadvantage. And 
if some others should cite the faith that the king had 
pledged to the pope, to undertake that enterprise for him 
in return for dissolving his marriage and for the hat of 
Rouen,12 I reply with what I will say below on the faith of 
II. The kingdom of Naples, often styled "the Kingdom." 
12. Louis XII had obtained from the pope an annulment of his 
marriage to Jeanne de Valois and a cardinalate (with hat) for his minister, 
Georges d' Amboise, bishop ofRouen. 
15 

princes and how it should be observed. 13 Thus, King Louis 
lost Lombardy for not having observed any of the conditions 
observed by others who have taken provinces and wished 
to hold them. Nor is this any miracle, but very ordinary 
and reasonable. And I spoke of this matter at Nantes with 
Rouen 14 when Valentino (for so Cesare Borgia, son of Pope 
Alexander, was called by the people) was occupying Ro­
magna. For when the cardinal of Rouen said to me that the 
Italians do not understand war, I replied to him that the 
French do not understand the state, because if they under­
stood they would not have let the Church come to such 
greatness. And it may be seen from experience that the 
greatness in Italy of the Church and of Spain has been caused 
by France, and France's ruin caused by them. From this one 
may draw a general rule that never or rarely fails: whoever is 
the cause of someone's becoming powerful is ruined; for 
that power has been caused by him either with industry or 
with force, and both the one and the other of these two are 
suspect to whoever has become powerful. 
13. See Chapter 18 below. 
14. During NM's first diplomatic mission to France; see his letter 
of November 21, 1500. 
5IV6 
Why the Kingdom of Darius 
Which Alexander Seized Did Not 
Rebel from His Successors after 
Alexander's Death 
The difficulties that are involved in holding a state newly 
acquired having been considered, one might marvel at how 
16 

it happened that Alexander the Great became lord of Asia in 
a few years, and just after he had seized it, died-from 
which it appeared reasonable that all that state would re­
bel-nonetheless the successors of Alexander maintained it 
and had no other difficulty in holding it than that which 
arose among themselves out of their own ambition.1 I reply 
that principalities of which memory remains have been gov­
erned in two diverse modes: either by one prince, and all the 
others servants who as ministers help govern the kingdom 
by his favor and appointment; or by a prince and by barons 
who hold that rank not by favor of the lord but by antiquity 
of bloodline. Such barons have their own states and subjects 
who recognize them as lords and hold them in natural 
affection. States that are governed by one prince and his 
servants hold their prince in greater authority because in 
all his province there is no one recognized as superior 
but himself; and if they obey someone else, they do so as a 
minister and official, and do not bear him any particular 
love. 
In our times the examples of these two diverse kinds of 
government are the Turk and the king of France. The whole 
monarchy of the Turk is governed by one lord; the others 
are his servants. Dividing his kingdom into sanjaks,2 he 
sends different administrators to them, and he changes and 
varies them as he likes. But the king of France is placed in 
the midst of an ancient multitude of lords, acknowledged in 
that state by their subjects and loved by them: they have 
their privileges, and the king cannot take them away with­
out danger to himself Thus, whoever considers the one and 
the other of these states will find difficulty in acquiring the 
state of the Turk, but should it be conquered, great ease in 
holding it. So inversely, you3 will find in some respects 
I. NM apparently refers to Alexander's rapid occupation of "Asia " 
in seven years, from 334 to 327 B.C., and its division among seven generals, 
eventually into eleven kingdoms, after his death. 
2. Administrative units. 
3. The formal or plural you. 
17 

more ease in seizing the state of France, but great difficulty 
in holding it. 
The causes of the difficulties in being able to seize the 
kingdom of the Turk are that one cannot be called in by 
the princes in that kingdom, and that one cannot hope to 
facilitate the enterprise through the rebellion of those 
around him. This arises from the reasons given above, for, 
since all are slaves and bound by obligation, they can be 
corrupted with much difficulty, and even if they are cor­
rupted, one can hope but for little use from it, as they cannot 
bring their peoples with them, for the reasons indicated. 
Hence, whoever attacks the Turk must necessarily assume 
that he will find him entirely united, and he had better put 
his hope more in his own forces than in the disorders of 
others. But once the Turk has been overcome and defeated 
in the field in such a way that he cannot rally his armies, 
one has only to fear the bloodline 9f the prince. If this is 
eliminated, there remains no one whom one would have to 
fear, since others do not have credit with the people; and just 
as the victor could put no hope in them before his victory, 
so he should not fear them after it. 
The contrary occurs with kingdoms governed like 
France: because you can easily enter there, having won over 
to yourself some baron of the kingdom; for malcontents and 
those who desire to innovate are always to be found. For the 
reasons given, they can open the way for you into that state 
and facilitate victory for you. Then your wish to maintain 
that victory for yourself brings in its wake infinite difficulties 
both from those who have helped you and from those you 
have oppressed. Nor is it enough tor you to eliminate the 
bloodline of the prince, because lords remain there who put 
themselves at the head of new changes; and since you can 
neither content them nor eliminate them, you lose that state 
whenever their opportunity comes. 
Now, if you4 consider what was the nature of Da-
4. The formal or plural you. 
18 

rius's5 government, you6 will find it similar to the kingdom 
of the Turk. Therefore, for Alexander it was necessary first 
to make an all-out attack on him and drive him from the 
field; after this victory, with Darius dead, that state re­
mained secure for Alexander for the reasons discussed 
above. And if his successors had been united, they could 
have enjoyed it at leisure, nor did any tumults occur in that 
kingdom besides those they themselves incited. But it is 
impossible to possess states ordered like France with such 
quiet. Hence arose the frequent rebellions in Spain, France,7 
and Greece against the Romans, because of the numerous 
principalities that existed in those states. As long as their 
memory lasted, the Romans were always uncertain of their 
possession, but when their memory was eliminated with the 
power and long duration of the empire, the Romans became 
secure possessors of them. And the Romans possessed them 
even though, when they later fought among themselves, 
each took for himself a part of those provinces in accordance 
with the authority he had got within it; and the provinces, 
because the bloodline of their former lords was eliminated, 
acknowledged no one but the Romans. Having considered 
all these things, therefore, no one will marvel at the ease 
with which Alexander held the state of Asia and at the 
difficulties others such as Pyrrhus8 and many more like him 
had in keeping their acquisitions. This has come not from 
much or little virtue in the victor but from the disparity in 
the subject. 
5. Darius III (380-330 B.C.) was the king of Persia who lost his 
empire to Alexander the Great. 
6. The formal or plural you. 
7· NM was pleased to call ancient Gaul by its modern name; see 
Discourses on Livy II 4. 
8. Pyrrhus (3 I9-272 B.C.), king of Epirus, captured Sicily and 
quickly lost it. 
19 

5v6 
How Cities or Principalities Which 
Lived by Their Own Laws 
before They Were Occupied 
Should Be Administered 
When those states that are acquired, as has been said, are 
accustomed to living by their own laws and in liberty, there 
are three modes for those who want to hold them: first, ruin 
them; second, go there to live personally; third, let them live 
by their laws, taking tribute from them and creating within 
them an oligarchical state which keeps them friendly to you. 
For since such a state has been created by that prince, it 
knows it cannot stand without his friendship and power, and 
it has to do everything to maintain him. And a city used to 
living free may be held more easily by means of its own 
citizens than in any other mode, if one wants to preserve it. 
As examples there are the Spartans and the Romans. 
The Spartans held Athens and Thebes by creating oligarchi­
cal states there; yet they lost them again. 1 The Romans, in 
order to hold Capua, Carthage, and Numantia, destroyed 
them and did not lose them.2 They wanted to hold Greece 
much as the Spartans had held it, by making it free and 
leaving it its own laws. But they did not succeed; so they 
were compelled to destroy many cities in that province so as 
to hold it. For in truth there is no secure mode to possess 
them other than to ruin them. And whoever becomes pa-
I. In Athens the regime of Thirty Tyrants was established by Spartan 
direction in 404 B.C., then overthrown in 403. In Thebes the victorious 
Spartans established an oligarchy in 382 B.C., which was overthrown by 
Pelopidas in 378. 
2. Capua was destroyed by the Romans after its rebellion, in 2Il 
B.C.; Carthage was destroyed in 146 B.C.; and Numantia in 133 B.C. 
20 

tron of a city accustomed to living free and does not destroy 
it, should expect to be destroyed by it; for it always has as a 
refuge in rebellion the name of liberty and its own ancient 
orders which are never forgotten either through length of 
time or because of benefits received. Whatever one does 
or provides for, unless the inhabitants are broken up or 
dispersed, they will not forget that name and those orders, 
and will immediately recur to them upon any accident as did 
Pisa after having been kept in servitude a hundred years by 
the Florentines.3 But, when cities or provinces are used to 
living under a prince, and his bloodline is eliminated-since 
on the one hand they are used to obeying, and on the other 
they do not have the old prince-they will not agree to 
make one from among themselves and they do not know 
how to live free. So they are slower to take up arms, and a 
prince can gain them with greater ease and can secure him­
self against them. But in republics there is greater life, 
greater hatred, more desire for revenge; the memory of 
their ancient liberty does not and cannot let them rest, 
so that the most secure path is to eliminate them or live 
in them. 
3. Pisa was acquired by Florence in 1405 and lost in 1494 because 
of the invasion of the king of France, Charles VIII. 
5VI6 
Of New Principalities That Are 
Acquired through One's Own 
Arms and Virtue 
No one should marvel if, in speaking as I will do of prin­
cipalities that are altogether new both in prince and in state, 
2 1  

I bring up the greatest examples. For since men almost 
always walk on paths beaten by others and proceed in their 
actions by imitation, unable either to stay on the paths of 
others altogether or to attain the virtue of those whom you 
imitate, a prudent man should always enter upon the paths 
beaten by great men, and imitate those who have been most 
excellent, so that if his own virtue does not reach that far, it 
is at least in the odor of it. He should do as prudent archers 
do when the place they plan to hit appears too distant, and 
knowing how far the strength 1 of their bow carries, they set 
their aim much higher than the place intended, not to reach 
such height with their arrow, but to be able with the aid of 
so high an aim to achieve their plan. 
I say, then, that in altogether new principalities, where 
there is a new prince, one encounters more or less difficulty 
in maintaining them according to whether the one who 
acquires them is more or less virtuous. And because the 
result of becoming prince from private individual presup­
poses either virtue or fortune, it appears that one or the 
other of these two things relieves in part many difficulties; 
nonetheless, he who has relied less on fortune has main­
tained himself more. To have the prince compelled to come 
to live there in person, because he has no other states, makes 
it still easier. But, to come to those who have become 
princes by their own virtue and not by fortune, I say that the 
most excellent are Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, Theseus, and 
the like. And although one should not reason about Moses, 
as he was a mere executor of things that had been ordered 
for him by God, nonetheless he should be admired if only 
for that grace which made him deserving of speaking with 
God. But let us consider Cyrus and the others who have 
acquired or founded kingdoms: you2 will find them all ad­
mirable; and if their particular actions and orders are consid-
I. lit.: virtue. 
2. The formal or plural you. 
22 

ered, they will appear no different from those of Moses, 
who had so great a teacher. And as one examines their 
actions and lives, one does not see that they had anything 
else from fortune than the opportunity, which gave them 
the matter enabling them to introduce any form they 
pleased. Without that opportunity their virtue of spirit 
would have been eliminated, and without that virtue the 
opportunity would have come in vain. 
It was necessary then for Moses to find the people of 
Israel in Egypt, enslaved and oppressed by the Egyptians, so 
that they would be disposed to follow him so as to get out of 
their servitude. It was fitting that Romulus not be received 
in Alba, that he should have been exposed at birth, if he was 
to become king of Rome and founder of that fatherland. 
Cyrus needed to find the Persians malcontent with the 
empire of the Medes, and the Medes soft and effeminate 
because of a long peace. Theseus could not have demon­
strated his virtue if he had not found the Athenians dis­
persed. Such opportunities, therefore, made these men 
happy, and their excellent virtue enabled the opportunity to 
be recognized; hence their fatherlands were ennobled by it 
and became very happy. 
Those like these men, who become princes by the 
paths of virtue, acquire their principality with difficulty but 
hold it with ease; and the difficulties they have in acquiring 
their principality arise in part from the new orders and 
modes that they are forced to introduce so as to found their 
state and their security. And it should be considered that 
nothing is more difficult to handle, more doubtful of suc­
cess, nor more dangerous to manage, than to put oneself at 
the head of introducing new orders. For the introducer has 
all those who benefit from the old orders as enemies, and he 
has lukewarm defenders in all those who might benefit 
from the new orders. This lukewarmness arises partly from 
fear of adversaries who have the laws on their side and 
partly from the incredulity of men, who do not truly be-
23 

lieve in new things unless they come to have a firm experi­
ence of them. Consequently, whenever those who are 
enemies have opportunity to attack, they do so with partisan 
zeal, and the others defend lukewarmly so that one is in peril 
along with them. It is however necessary, if one wants to 
discuss this aspect well, to examine whether these innova­
tors stand by themselves or depend on others; that is, 
whether to carry out their deed they must beg3 or indeed 
can use force. In the first case they always come to ill and 
never accomplish anything; but when they depend on their 
own and are able to use force, then it is that they are rarely in 
peril. From this it arises that all the armed prophets con­
quered and the unarmed ones were ruined. For, besides the 
things that have been said, the nature of peoples is variable; 
and it is easy to persuade them of something, but difficult to 
keep them in that persuasion. And thus things must be 
ordered in such a mode that when they no longer believe, 
one can make them believe by force. Moses, Cyrus, The­
seus, and Romulus would not have been able to make their 
peoples observe their constitutions for long if they had been 
unarmed, as happened in our times to Brother Girolamo 
Savonarola. He was ruined in his new orders as soon as the 
multitude began not to believe in them, and he had no 
mode for holding firm those who had believed nor for mak­
ing unbelievers believe.4 Men such as these, therefore, find 
great difficulty in conducting their affairs; all their dangers 
are along the path, and they must overcome them with 
virtue. But once they have overcome them and they begin 
to be held in veneration, having eliminated those who had 
3. Or pray. 
4. Savonarola (1452-98) was a Dominican friar who came to Flor­
ence to preach in 1481, and succeeded in convincing the Florentines, who 
thought themselves "neither rude nor ignorant," that "he spoke with 
God." C( Discourses on Livy I 11, where NM praises this accomplishment 
and does not refer, as he does here, to Savonarola's terrible end by burning 
at the stake. 
24 

envied them for their quality, they remain powerful, se UI " 
honored, and happy. 
To such high examples I want to add a lesser example, 
but it will have some proportion with the others and I 
want it to suffice for all other similar cases: this is Hiero 
of Syracuse. From private individual he became prince of 
Syracuse, nor did he receive anything more from fortune 
than the opportunity. For when the Syracusans were op­
pressed, they chose him as their captain, and from there he 
proved worthy of being made their prince. And he was of 
such virtue, even in private fortune, that he who wrote of 
him said "that he lacked nothing of being a king except a 
kingdom." 5 Hiero eliminated the old military and organized 
a new one; he left his old friendships and made new ones; 
and when he had friendships and soldiers that were his own, 
he could build any building on top of such a foundation; so 
he went through a great deal of trouble to acquire, and little 
to maintain. 
5. Possible sources: Polybius, I 8, 16; VII 8; Livy XX IV 4; Justin, 
XXIII 4; I Samuel 18: 8. Cf. the Dedicatory Letter to the Discourses on Livy. 
5VII6 
Of New Principalities That Are 
Acquired by Others' Arms 
and Fortune 
Those who become princes from private individual solely 
by fortune become so with little trouble, but maintain 
themselves with much. They have no difficulty along the 
path because they fly there, but all the difficulties arise when 
25 

they are in place. And such princes come to be when a state 
is given to someone either for money or by the favor of 
whoever gives it, as happened to many in Greece, in the 
cities oflonia and of the Hellespont, where they were made 
princes by Darius so that they might hold on to those cities 
for his security and glory; 1 as also those emperors were made 
who from private individual attained the empire through 
corrupting the soldiers.2 These persons rest simply on the 
will and fortune of whoever has given a state to them, which 
are two very inconstant and unstable things. They do not 
know how to hold and they cannot hold that rank: they do 
not know how, because if one is not a man of great ingenuity 
and virtue, it is not reasonable, that having always lived in 
private fortune, he should know how to command; they 
cannot hold that rank because they do not have forces that 
can be friendly and faithful to them. Then, too, states that 
come to be suddenly, like all other things in nature that 
are born and grow quickly, cannot have roots and branches, 
so that the first adverse weather3 eliminates them-un­
less, indeed, as was said, those who have suddenly become 
princes have so much virtue that they know immediately 
how to prepare to keep what fortune has placed in their laps; 
and the foundations that others have laid before becoming 
princes they lay afterwards. 
To both of the modes mentioned of becoming prince, 
by virtue or by fortune, I want to bring up two examples 
that have occurred in days within our memory; and these 
are Francesco Sforza and Cesare Borgia. Francesco became 
duke of Milan from private individual by proper means4 and 
with a great virtue of his own; and that which he had 
acquired with a thousand pains he maintained with little 
trouble. On the other hand Cesare Borgia, called Duke 
1. Darius I (52 1-486 B.C.), not Darius III of Chapter 4. 
2. On the election of Roman emperors by soldiers, see Chapter 19. 
3. Or time. 
4. For this phrase see NM, Discourses on Livy I 4 1. 
26 

Valentino by the vulgar, acquired his state through the for­
tune of his father and lost it through the same, notwith­
standing the fact that he made use of every deed and did all 
those things that should be done by a prudent and virtuous-=-­
man to put his roots in the states that the arms and fortune of __ 
others a glV 
.
. 
or, as was sal a ove, w oever oes ____ 
nohay iUs foundations at first might be able, with great 
virtue, to lay them later, although they might have to be 
laid with hardship for the architect and with danger to the 
building. Thus, if one considers all the steps of the duke, 
one will see that he had laid for himself great foundations 
for future power, which I do not judge superfluous to dis-
cuss; for I do not know what better teaching I could give to 
a new prince than the example of his actions. And if his 
orders did not bring profit to him, it was not his fault, 
because this arose from an extraordinary and extreme malig-
nity of fortune. 
Alexander V I  had very many difficulties, both present 
and future, when he decided to make his son the duke great. 
First, he did not see the path to being able to make him lord 
of any state that was not a state of the Church; and when he 
decided to take that of the Church, he knew that the duke of 
Milan and the Venetians would not consent to it because 
Faenza and Rimini had for long been under the protection 
of the Venetians. Besides this, he saw that the arms of Italy, 
and especially the arms of anyone whom he might have 
been able to make use of, were in the hands of those who 
had to fear the greatness of the pope; and so he could not 
trust them, as they were all with the Orsini and the Colonna 
and their accomplices.5 It was thus necessary to upset thosğ 
orders and to bring disorder to their states so as to be able to 
make himself lord securely of part of them. This was easy 
fOfliiin, because he found that the Venetians, moved by 
other causes, were engaged in getting the French to come 
5. The Orsini and Colonna were the two principal noble families 
of Rome which had long fought for control of Rome and the papacy. 
27 

back into Italy, which he not only did not oppose but made 
easier by the dissolution of the former marriage of King 
Louis. So the king came into Italy with the aid of the Vene­
tians and the consent of Alexander, and he was no sooner in 
Milan than the pope got men from him for a campaign in 
Romagna, which was granted to him because of the reputa­
tion of the king. So after the duke had acquired Romagna 
and beaten down the Colonna, two things prevented him 
from maintaining that and going further ahead: one, that his 
arms did not appear to him to be faithful; the other, the will 
of France: that is, the Orsini arms of which he had availed 
himself might fail under him, and not only prevent him 
from acquiring but also take away what he had acquired; and 
the king might also do the same to him. He had a test of 
the Orsini when, after the capture of Faenza, he attacked 
Bologna and saw them go coolly to that attack; and regard­
ing the king, the duke knew his mind when after he had 
taken the duchy of Urbino, he attacked Tuscany, and the 
king made him desist from that campaign. Hence the duke 
decided to depend no longer on the arms and fortune of 
others. And the first thing he did was to weaken the Orsini 
and Colonna parties in Rome. For he gained to himself all 
their adherents, who were gentlemen, by making them his 
gentlemen and by giving them large allowances; and he 
honored them, according to their qualities, with commands 
and with government posts, so that in a few months the 
partisan affections in their minds were eliminated, and all 
affection turned toward the duke. After this he waited for an 
opportunity to eliminate the heads of the Orsini, since he 
had dispersed those of the Colonna house. A good one came 
to him, and he used it better; for when the Orsini became 
aware, late, that the greatness of the duke and of the Church 
was ruin for them, they held a meeting at Magione, near 
Perugia.6 From that arose rebellion in Urbino, tumults in 
6. October 9, 1 502. 
28 

Romagna, and infinite dangers for the duke, who overcame 
them all with the aid of the French. And when his reputa­
tion had been restored, he trusted neither France nor other 
external forces, and so as not to put them to the test, he 
turned to deceit. He knew so well how to dissimulate his 
intent that the Orsini themselves, through Signor Paolo, 
became reconciled with him. The duke did not fail to 
fulfill every kind of duty to secure Signor Paolo, giving 
him money, garments, and horses, so that their simplicity 
brought them into the duke's hands at Sinigaglia.7 So, when 
these heads had been eliminated, and their partisans had 
been turned into his friends, the duke had laid very good 
foundations for his power, since he had all Romagna with 
the duchy of Urbino. He thought, especially, that he had 
acquired the friendship of Romagna, and that he had gained 
all those peoples to himself since they had begun to taste 
well-being. 
r 
And because this ..£.oint isWeserving of notice and of 
being imitated by others.JI do not want to leave it out. Once 
the dukfhad taen oveS Romagna, he found it had been 
commalliied by Impotent lords who had been readier to 
despoil their subjects than to correct them, and had given 
their subjects matter for disunion, not for union. Since that 
province was quite full of robberies, quarrels, and every 
other kind of insolence, hejudged It necessary to give it 
good government, if he wanted to reduce It to peace and' _ 
ooedience to a kingly arm. So he put there Messer Remirro ' 
de Orco, a cruel and ready man, to whom he-gave the fullest __ 
power. 8 In a short time Remirro reduced it to peace and 
unity, with the very greatest reputation for himself Then 
7. See NM's narration of this event in "A Description of the Method 
Used by Duke Valentino in Killing Vitellozzo Vitelli , Oliverotto da Fermo, 
and Others," in Allan Gilbert, trans., Chief Works of Machiavelli, 3 vols. 
(Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press, 1965), 1 : 163-69. 
8. power: potesta, not potenzia; the phrase recalls the papal claim of 
plenitudo potestatis. 
29 

r the duke judged that such excessive authority was not nec­
essary, because he feared that it might become hateful; and 
,.--
e set up 
IVI cour m t e rn! 
e of the prov· 
e, with a 
most exce en 
r
ent, where each city had its advocate. 
And because he knew that past rigors had generated some 
hatred for Remirro, to purge the spirits of that people and to 
gain them entirely to himself, he wished to show that if any 
./ cruelty had been committed, this had not come from him 
/' but from the harsh nature of his minister. And having seized 
this opportunity, he had him placed one morning in the 
piazza at Cesena in two pieces, with a piece of wood and a 
bloody knife beside him. The ferocity of this spectacle left 
the people at once satisfied and stupefied. 
-
,---- +et os remrn to w off I say that when 
the duke found himself very powerful and secure in part 
against present dangers-since he had armed to suit himself 
and had in good part eliminated those arms which were near 
enough to have attacked 9 him-there remained for him, if 
he wanted to proceed with acquisition, to consider the king 
of France. For he knew that this would not be tolerated by 
the king, who had been late to perceive his error. And so he 
began to seek out new friendships and to vacillate with 
France in the expedition that the French were making to­
ward the kingdom of Naples against the Spanish who were 
besieging Gaeta. His intent was to secure himself against 
them: 10 in which he would soon have succeeded, if Alexan­
der had lived. 
And these were his arrangements as to present things. 
But as to the future, he had to fear, first, that a new suc­
cessor in the Church might not be friendly to him and 
might seek to take away what Alexander had given him. He 
thought he might secure himself against this in four modes: 
first, to eliminate the bloodlines of all those lords he had 
9. lit.: offended. 
10. assure himself of Spanish support, or against the French. 
30 

despoiled, so as to take that opportunity away from the 
pope; second, to win over to himself all the gentlemen in 
Rome, as was said, so as to be able to hold the pope in check 
with them; third, to make the College of Cardinals as much 
his as he could; fourth, to acquire so much empire before 
the pope died that he could resist a first attack1 1  on his own. 
Of these four things he had accomplished three at the death 
of Alexander; the fourth he almost accomplished. For of the 
lords he had despoiled he killed as many as he could reach, 
and very few saved themselves; the Roman gentlemen had 
been won over to himself; in the College he had a very large 
party; and as to new acquisition, he had planned to become 
lord over Tuscany, he already possessed Perugia and Piom­
bino, and he had taken Pisa under his protection. And, as 
soon as he did not have to pay regard to France (which he 
did not have to do any longer, since the French had already 
been stripped of the kingdom by the Spanish, so that each of 
them was forced of necessity to buy his friendship), he 
would have jumped on Pisa. After this, Lucca and Siena 
would have quickly yielded, in part through envy of the 
Florentines, in part through fear; the Florentines had no 
remedy. If he had succeeded in this (as he was succeeding 
the same year that Alexander died), he would have acquired 
such force and reputation that he would have stood by 
himself and would no longer have depended on the fortune 
and force of someone else, but on his own power12 and 
virtue. But Alexander died five years after he 13 had begun to 
draw his sword. He left the duke with only the state of 
Romagna consolidated, with all the others in the air, be­
tween two very powerful enemy armies, and sick to death . 
And there was such ferocity and such virtue in the duke, and 
he knew so well how men have to be won over or lost, and 
I I. lit.: impetus. 
12. potenzia. 
13. Alexander or Cesare? 
3 1  

so sound were the found ations th at he h ad l aid in so litde 
time, th at if he h ad not h ad these armies on his b ack or if 
he h ad been he althy, he would h ave been equ al to every 
difficulty. And th at his found ations were good one m ay see : 
Rom agn a w aited for him for more th an a month; in Rome, 
though he w as h alf -alive, he rem ained secure; and although 
the B aglioni, Vitelli, and Orsini c ame to Rome, none fol­
lowed them ag ainst him; if he could not m ake pope whom­
ever he w anted, at le ast it would not be someone he did not 
w ant. But if at the de ath of Alex ander the duke h ad been 
he althy, everything would h ave been e asy for him. And he 
told me, on the d ay th at Julius II w as cre ated,14 th at he h ad 
thought about wh at might h appen when his f ather w as 
dying, and h ad found a remedy for everything, except th at 
he never thought th at at his de ath he himself would also be 
on the point of dying. 
Thus, if I summed up all the actions of the duke, I 
would not know how to repro ach him; on the contr ary, it 
seems to me he should be put forw ard, as I h ave done, to be 
imit ated by all those who h ave risen to empire through 
fortune and by the arms of others. For with his gre at spirit 
and high intention, he could not h ave conducted himself 
otherwise and the only things in the w ay of his pl ans were 
the brevity of Alex ander 's life and his own sickness. So 
whoever judges it necess ary in his new princip ality to secure 
himself ag ainst enemies, to g ain friends to himsel f, to con­
quer either by force or by fr aud, to m ake himself loved 
and fe ared by the people, and followed and revered by the 
soldiers, to elimin ate those who c an or might offend 15 you, 
to renew old orders through new modes, to be severe and 
ple as ant, m agn animous and liber al, to elimin ate an un ­
f aith ful milit ary, to cre ate a new one, to m aint ain friend-
14. NM was in Rome at the time of the conclave that electedJulius 
II pope in October-December 1503. 
IS. olfendere (here and below) is not merely to slight, but to harm 
so as to cause offense. 
/" 

ships with kings and princes so th at they must either bene fit 
you with f avor or be hesit ant to offend you-c an find no 
fresher 
only accuse him in the cre ation of Julius as pontiff, in which 
he m ade a b ad choice; for, as w as s aid, though he could not 
m ake a pope to suit himself, he could h ave kept anyone 
from being pope. And for the p ap acy he should never h ave 
consented to those c ardin als whom he h ad offended or who, 
h aving become pope, would h ave to be afr aid of him. For 
men offend either from fe ar or for h atred. Those whom he 
h ad offended were, among others, S an Piero ad 
Vincul a, 
Colonn a, S an Giorgio, Asc anio; 16 all the others, if they h ad 
become pope, would h ave h ad to fe ar him, except Rouen 
and the Sp ani ards, the l atter bec ause of kinship and oblig a­
tion, the former for his power, bec ause he w as connected 
to the kingdom of Fr ance.1? Therefore the duke, before 
everything else, should h ave cre ated a Sp ani ard pope, and if 
he could not, should h ave consented to Rouen, and not S an 
Piero ad 
Vincul a. And whoever believes th at among gre at 
person ages new benefits 
deceives himself 18 So the duke erred in this choice and it 
w as the c ause of his ultim ate ruin. 
16. In this irreverent listing of cardinals, Giuliano della Rovere 
(who became Pope Julius II) is named by his church in Rome, San Pietro 
in Vincoli; Giovanni Colonna; Raffaelo Riario, named for San Giorgio; 
Ascanio Sforza. 
17 . Cardinal Georges d' Amboise, bishop of Rouen; see Chapter 3. 
1 8 .  See NM, Discourses on Livy III 4. 
33 

VIII 
Of Those Who Have Attained a 
Principality through Crimes 
But, bec ause one becomes prince from priv ate individu al 
also by two modes which c annot be altogether attributed 
either to fortune or to virtue, I do not think they should be 
left out, although one of them c an be re asoned about more 
amply where republics are tre ated. 1 These are when one 
ascends to a princip ality by some crimin al and nef arious p ath 
or when a priv ate citizen becomes prince of his f atherl and 
by the support of his fellow citizens. And, to spe ak of the 
first 
the other modern, without entering otherwise into the 
merits of this issue, bec ause I judge it sufficient, 
would find 
Ag athocles the Sicili an 2  bec ame king of Syr acuse not 
only from priv ate fortune but from a me an and ab ject one. 
Born of a potter, he alw ays kept to a life 
r ank of his c areer; nonetheless, his crimes were accom­
p anied with such virtue of spirit and body th at when he 
turned to the milit ary, he rose through its r anks to become 
pr aetor of Syr acuse. After he w as est ablished in th at r ank, he 
decided to become prince and to hold with violence and 
without oblig ation to anyone else th at which h ad been 
conceded to him by agreement. H aving given intelligence 
of his pl an to H amilc ar the C arth agini an, who w as with his 
armies fighting in Sicily, one morning he assembled the 
people and Sen ate of Syr acuse as if he h ad to decide things 
pertinent to the republic. At a sign al he h ad ordered, he h ad 
all the sen ators and the richest of the people killed by his 
1. See Discourses on Livy; note that NM does not say which of the 
two modes is reasoned about more amply "where republics are treated." 
2. Agathocles lived from 361 to 289 B.d; his tyranny began in 3 16 .  
34 

soldiers. Once they were dead, he seized and held the prin­
cipate3 of that city without any civil controversy. And 
although he was defeated twice by the Carthaginians and in 
the end besieged, not only was he able to defend his city but 
also, leaving part of his men for defense against the siege, 
he attacked Africa with the others. In a short time he freed 
Syracuse from the siege and brought the Carthaginians to 
dire necessity; they were compelled of necessity to come to 
an agreement with him, to be content with the possession of 
A frica, and to leave Sicily to Agathocles. Thus, whoever 
might consider the actions and virtue of this man will see 
nothing or little that can be attributed to fortune. For as was 
said above, not through anyone's support but through the 
ranks of the military, which he had gained for himself with a 
thousand hardships and dangers, he came to the principate 
and afterwards he maintained it with many spirited and 
dangerous policies. Yet one cannot call it virtue to kill one 's 
citizens, betray one 's friends, to be without faith, without 
mercy, without religion; these modes can enable one to 
acquire empire, but not glo ry. For, if one considers the 
v irtue of Agathocles in entering into and escaping from 
dangers, and the greatness of his spirit in enduring and 
overcoming adversities, one does not see why he has to be 
judged inferior to any most excellent captain. Nonetheless, 
his savage cruelty and inhumanity, together with his infinite 
crimes, do not permit him to be celebrated among the most 
excellent men. Thus, one cannot attribute to fortune or to 
virtue what he achieved without either. 
In our times, during the reign of Alexander VI, Liv­
erotto da Fermo,4 having been left a fatherless child some 
years before, was brought up by a maternal uncle of his 
3 .  Or principality; principato can mean the ruling or dominating 
office as well as the realm of domination. 
4. Oliverotto Euffreducci da Fermo, who took power in Fermo on 
December 26, 1501, and a year later was strangled by order of Cesare 
Borgia at Sinigaglia. 
35 

called Giovanni Fogliani, and in the fi
he was sent out to soldie r unde r Paolo VitelliS so that when 
he was ve rsed in that discipline, he would attain an excellent 
rank in the milita ry. Then when Paolo died, he fought unde r 
Vitellozzo, his b rothe r, and in a ve ry sho rt time, since he was 
ingenious and dashing in pe rson and spi rit, he became the 
fi rst man in his milita ry. But as it appea red to him se rvile to 
be at the level of othe rs, he thought that with the aid of 
certain citizens of Fermo to whom servitude was dea re r  
than the libe rty of thei r fathe rland, and with suppo rt from 
the Vitelli, he would seize Fe rmo. And he w rote to Gio­
vanni Fogliani that since he had been away from home a few 
yea rs, he wanted to come to see him and his city, and in 
some pa rt to acknowledge his pat rimony; and because he 
had not t roubled himself fo r anything but to acqui re hono r, 
he wanted to come in hono rable fashion accompanied by a 
hund red horsemen of his friends and se rvants, so that his 
citizens might see that he had not spent the time in vain. He 
begged Giovanni to please o rde r that he be received hono r­
ably by the inhabitants of Fe rmo, which would di rect hono r 
not only to him but to Giovanni himself, since Live rotto 
was his wa rd. The reupon Giovanni did not fail in any p rop­
e r  
duty to his nephew; and when Live rotto had been hono r­
ably received by the inhabitants of Fermo, he was lodged in 
Giovanni's house. The re, afte r a few days had passed, and 
afte r he had waited to o rde r sec retly what was necessa ry fo r 
his futu re c rime, he held a most solemn banquet to which 
he invited Giovanni Fogliani and all the fi rst men of Fe rmo. 
And when the food and all othe r entertainments customary 
at such banquets had been enjoyed, Live rotto, with cun­
ning,6 opened ce rtain g rave discussions,7 speaking of the 
5. A famous condottielle, he was hired by the Florentines and then 
beheaded by them in 1499 for suspected treachery. 
6 .  lit.: art. 
7. lit.: reasonings. 

g reatness of Pope Alexande r and of Cesa re Bo rgia, his son, 
and of thei r unde rtakings. While Giovanni and the othe rs 
we re 
responding to these discussions, Live rotto at a st roke 
stood up, saying that these we re things that should be spoken 
of in a mo re sec ret place; and he withd rew to a room into 
which Giovanni and all the othe r citizens came behind him. 
No soone r we re they seated than soldie rs came out of sec ret 
places and killed Giovanni and all the othe rs. Afte r this 
homicide, Live rotto mounted on ho rse, rode th rough the 
town and besieged the highest magist racy in the palace so 
that th rough fea r they we re compelled to obey him and to 
establish a gove rnment of which he was made p rince. And 
since all those who could have hu rtS him because they we re 
malcontent we re dead, he st rengthened himself with new 
civil and milita ry o rde rs, so that in the pe riod of one yea r 
that he held the p rincipality, he was not only secu re in the 
city of Fe rmo but had become fea rsome to all his neighbo rs. 
And to ove rth row him would have been as difficult 
ove rth row Agathodes if he had not pe rmitted himself to be 
deceived by Cesa re Bo rgia when at Sinigaglia, as was said 
above, he took the O rsini and the Vitelli. The re Live rotto 
too was taken, one yea r afte r the pa rricide he committed, 
and togethe r with Vitellozzo, who had been his maste r in 
his vi rtues and c rimes, he was st rangled. 
Someone could question how it happened that Agath­
odes and anyone like him, afte r in finite 
c ruelties, could live fo r a long time secu re in his fathe r­
land, defend himself against exte rnal enemies, and neve r be 
conspi red against by his citizens, inasmuch as many othe rs 
have not been able to maintain thei r states th rough c ruelty 
even in peace ful times, not to mention unce rtain times of 
wa r. I believe that this comes from c ruelties badly used o r  
well used. Those can be called well used (if 
to speak well of evil ) that a re done at a st roke, out of the 
8. lit.: offended. 
37 

necessity to secure oneself, and then are not persisted in but 
are turned to as much utility for the sub jects as one can. 
Those cruelties are badly used which, though few in the 
beginning, rather grow with time than are eliminated. 
Those who observe the first mode can have some remedy 
for their state with God and with men, as had Agathocles; as 
for the others it is impossible for them to maintain them ­
selves. 
Hence it should be noted that in taking hold of a state, 
he who seizes it should review all the offenses necessary for 
him to commit, and do them all at a stroke, so as not to have 
to renew them every day and, by not renewing them, to 
secure men and gain them to himself with bene fits. Who ­
ever does otherwise, either through timidity or through bad 
counsel, is always under necessity to hold a knife in his hand; 
nor can one ever found himself on his sub jects if, because of 
fresh and continued in juries, they cannot be secure against 
him. For in juries must be done all together, so that, being 
tasted less, they offend less; and benefits 
by little so that they may be tasted better.9 And above all, a 
prince should live with his sub jects so that no single accident 
whether bad or good has to make him change; for when 
necessities come in adverse times you will not be in time for 
evil, and the good that you do does not help you, because 
it is judged to be forced on you, and cannot bring you 
. d 
/ 
any gratltu e. 
9. See Discourses on Livy 145. 
GIXH 
Of the Civil Principality 
But, coming to the other policy, when a private citizen 
becomes prince of his fatherland, not through crime or 

other intolerable violence but with the support of his fellow 
citizens (which 
virtue nor all fortune is necessary to attain it, but rather a 
fortunate astuteness) -I say that one ascends to this princi­
pality either with the support of the people or with the 
support of the great. For in every city these two diverse 
humors are found, which arises from 
desire neither to be commanded nor oppressed by the great, 
and the great desire to command and oppress the people. 
From these two diverse appetites one of three effects occurs 
in cities: principality or liberty or license. 
Principality is caused either by the people or by the 
great, according to which of these sides has the opportunity 
for it. For when the great see they cannot resist the people, 
they begin to give reputation to one of themselves, and they 
make him prince so that they can vent their appetite under 
his shadow. So too, the people, when they see they cannot 
resist the great, give reputation to one, and make him prince 
so as to be defended with his authority. He who comes to 
the principality with the aid of the great maintains himself 
with more difficu lty than one who becomes prince with the 
aid of the people, because the former finds himself prince 
with many around him who appear to be his equals, and 
because of this he can neither command them nor manage 
them to suit himself But he who arrives in the principality 
with popular support finds 
him has either no one or very few who are not ready to 
obey. Besides this, one cannot satisfy the great with de­
cency and without in jury to others, but one can satisfy the 
people; for the end of the peop le is more decent than that of 
the great, since the great want to oppress and the people 
want not to be oppressed. Furthermore, a prince can never 
secure himself against a hostile people, as they are too 
many; against the great, he can secure himself, as they are 
few. The worst that a prince can expect from a hostile 
people is to be abandoned by it; but from the great, when 
they are hostile, he must fear not only being abandoned but 
39 

also that they may come against him, for since there is more 
foresight and more astuteness in the great, they always move 
in time to save themselves, and they seek rank from those 
they hope will win. Also, the prince always lives of necessity 
with the same people, but he can well do without the same 
great persons, since he can make and unmake them every 
day, and take away and give them reputation at his conve­
mence. 
And to better clarify this issue, I say that the great must 
be considered in two modes chie fly. 
themselves so that in their proceedings they are obligated 
in everything to your fortune, or not. Those who are obli­
gated, and are not rapacious, must be honored and loved; 
those who are not obligated have to be examined in two 
modes. Either they do this out of pusillanimity and a natural 
defect of spirit; then you must make use especially of those 
who are of good counsel, because in prosperity they bring 
you honor and in adversity you do not have to fear them; 
but, when by art and for an ambitious cause, they are not 
obligated, it is a sign that they are thinking more for them­
selves than for you; and the prince must be on guard against 
them, and fear them as if they were open enemies, because 
in adversity they will always help ruin him. 
Therefore, one who becomes prince through the sup­
port of the people should keep them friendly to him, which 
should be easy for him because they ask of him only that 
they not be oppressed. But one who becomes prince against 
the people with the support of the great must before every­
thing else seek to gain the people to himsel f, which should 
be easy for him when he takes up its protection. And since 
men who receive good from someone from whom they 
believed they would receive evil are more obligated to 
their benefactor, the people immediately wish him well 
more than if he had been brought to the principality with 
their support. The prince can gain the people to himself 
in many modes, for which one cannot give certain rules 
40 

because the modes vary according to circumstances,1 and so 
they will be left out. I will conclude only that for a prince it 
is necessary to have the people friendly; other wise he has no 
remedy in adversity. 
Nabis, prince of the Spartans,2 withstood a siege by all 
Greece and by one of Rome 's most victorious armies, and 
defended his fatherland and his state against them : and when 
danger supervened it was enough for him to secure himself 
only against a few, which would not have been enough if he 
had had a hostile people . And let no one resist my opinion 
on this with that trite proverb, that whoever founds on the 
people founds on mud. For that is true when a private 
citizen lays his foundation on them, and allows himself to 
think that the people will liberate him if he is oppressed by 
enemies or by the magistrates (in 
deceived, like the Gracchi in Rome3 and Messer Giorgio 
Scali in Florence).4 But when a prince who founds on the 
people knows how to command and is a man full of heart, 
does not get frightened in adversity, does not fail to make 
other preparations, and with his spirit and his orders keeps 
the generality of peoples inspired, he will never find himself 
deceived by them and he will see he has laid his foundations 
well. 
These principalities customarily run into peril when 
I. lit.: according to the subject. 
2. NM considers Nabis a tyrant in Discourses on Livy I 10, 40; and 
in III 6 he tells how Nabis was assassinated despite his popular support. He 
ruled Sparta from 205 to 192 B.C. 
3. The Gracchi brothers Tiberius and Gaius Sempronius were 
tribunes of the plebs but lost their lives to their enemies in the Senate, 
Tiberius in 133 and Gaius in 121 B.C.; see Discourses on Livy 137. 
4. A head of the Ciompi rebellion in Florence (1378), who ruled 
for three years thereafter and then was beheaded; see NM's Florentine 
Histories III 18,20. 
5. lit.: the universal. NM, in accord with the usage of his time, says 
"universal" in cases where we would expect "general," since apparently 
not everyone (not to mention everything) is meant. 
41 

they are about to ascend from 
one. For these princes either command by themselves or by 
means of magistrates. In the latter case their position is 
weaker and more dangerous because they remain altogether 
at the will of those citizens who have been put in the magis­
tracies, who, especially in adverse times, can take away his 
state with great ease either by turning against him or by not 
obeying him. And the prince does not have time in the 
midst of danger to seize absolute authority because the citi­
zens and subjects, who are accustomed to receive com­
mands from the magistrates, are not ready, in these emer­
gencies, to obey his; he will always have, in uncertain times, 
a shortage of those one can trust. For such a prince cannot 
found himself on what he sees in quiet times, when citizens 
have need of the state, because then everyone runs, every­
one promises, and each wants to die for him when death is 
at a distance; but in adverse times, when the state has need of 
citizens, then few of them are to be found. And this test is all 
the more dangerous since one cannot make it but once. And 
so a wise prince must think of a way by which his citizens, 
always and in every quality of time, have need of the state 
and of himself; and then they will always be faithful to him. 
GXH 
In What Mode the Forces of All 
Principalities Should Be Measured 
In 
admit another consideration; that is, whether a prince has 
enough of a state that he can rule by himself when he needs 
to, or whether he is always under the necessity of being 
defended by others. And, to better clarify this issue, I say 
42 

that I judge those capable of ruling by themselves who can, 
by abundance of either men or money, put together an 
adequate army and fight 
attack them; and I judge as well that those always have 
necessity of others who cannot appear in the field 
enemy, but are compelled of necessity to take refuge behind 
walls and to guard them. The first 
and in what is to come we will say what is required for it. In 
the second case one can only exhort such princes to fortify 
and supply their own towns,2 and to take no account of the 
countryside. And whoever has forti fied his town well, and 
has managed the other governing of his sub jects as was said 
above and will be said below, will be attacked always with 
great hesitation; for men are always hostile to undertakings 
where difficulties 
to attack one who has a strong town and is not hated by 
the people. 
The cities of Germany3 are very free, have little coun­
tryside, and obey the emperor when they want to; they do 
not fear either him or any other power around, because they 
are so well forti fied that everyone thinks their capture 
would be toilsome and difficult. 
able ditches and walls, and sufficient artillery; they always 
keep in their public stores enough to drink and to eat and to 
burn for a year. Besides this, so as to keep the plebs fed 
without loss to the public, they always keep in common 
supply enough to be able to give them work for a year in 
employments that are the nerve and the life of that city and 
of the industries from which the plebs is fed. They still hold 
1. lit.: a just army and make a day; see NM, Discourses on Livy II 
17· 
2. lit.: land or earth. 
3· NM discussed the German cities in Discourses on Livy I 55; II pr., 
19; and also in two minor works, Rapporto delle cose della Magna and Ritratto 
delLe case della Magna. 
43 

military exercises in repute, and they have many institu­
tions 4 to maintain them. 
Thus a prince who has a strong city and does not make 
himself hated cannot be attacked; and if indeed there is 
someone who would attack him, he would have to retreat 
in shame, for wo rldly things are so va riable that it is next to 
impossible for one to stand with his armies idle in a siege for 
a year. And someone might reply: if the people have their 
possessions outside, and see them burning, they will not 
have patience for this, and the long siege and their loves for 
their own will make them forget the prince. I respond that a 
powe rful and spi rited prince will always overcome all these 
difficulties, 
will not last long, now by giving them fear of the enemy's 
cruelty, now by securing himself skill fully against those who 
appear to him too bold. Besides this, the enemy reasonably 
would burn and ruin the countryside on his a rrival, at a time 
when men's spirits are still hot and willing for defense; and 
thus the prince should hesitate so much the less, because 
after several days, when spirits have cooled, the damage has 
already been done, the evil has been received, and there is 
no more remedy for it. At that time they come to unite with 
their prince so much the more, since it appears he has an 
obligation toward them, their houses having been burned 
and their possessions ruined in his defense. And the nature 
of men is to be obligated as much by benefits 
bene fits 
should not be difficult 
of his citizens firm 
does not lack the wherewithal for life and for defense. 
4. lit.: orders. 
5- lit.: charity. 
44 

GXIH 
Of Ecclesiastical Principalities 
It 
palities. All difficulties 
are possessed, because they are acquired either by virtue or 
by fortune and are maintained without the one or the other, 
for they are sustained by orders that have grown old with 
religion, which have been so powerful and of such a kind 
that they keep their princes in the state however they pro­
ceed and live. These alone have states, and do not defend 
them; they have sub jects, and do not govern them; and the 
states, though undefended, are not taken from them; the 
sub jects, though ungoverned, do not care, and they neither 
think of becom ing estranged from such princes nor can 
they. Thus, only these principalities are secure and happy. 
But as they subsist by superior causes,l to which the hu­
man mind does not reach, I 
since they are exalted and maintained by God, it would 
be the office 
course on them. Nonetheless, if someone were to inquire of 
me how it came about that the Church has come to such 
greatness in temporal affairs despite the fact that, before 
Alexander, the Italian 
called powers but every baron and lord, even the least, held 
her in low esteem in temporal affairs -and now a k ing of 
France trembles at her and she has been able to remove him 
from Italy 
it does not seem to me superfluous to recall a good part of it 
to memory. 
Before 
Charles, king of 
France, came into 
Italy, 
this province was under the power of the pope, the Vene-
I. Lisio and Bertelli read a singular "cause." 
2. Charles VIII, in 1494. 
45 

tians, the king of Naples, the duke of Milan, and the Flo ren­
tines. These powe rs had to have two p rincipal conce rns : 
one, that a fo reigne r not ente r into Italy with a rms; the 
othe r, that none of them enla rge his state. Those who con­
ce rned them the most we re the pope and the Venetians. And 
to hold back the Venetians the union of all the othe rs was 
needed, as in the defense of Fe rra ra; to hold down the pope 
they made use of the ba rons in Rome . Since these we re 
divided into two factions, O rsini and Colonna, the re was 
always cause fo r qua rrel3 between them; and standing with 
a rms in hand unde r the eyes of the pontiff, they kept the 
ponti ficate 
like Sixtus,4 sometimes rose up, still fo rtune o r  wisdom 
could neve r release him f rom these inconveniences. And 
the b revity of thei r lives was the cause of it; fo r in the ten 
yea rs on the ave rage that a pope lived, he would have t rouble 
putting down one of the factions.5 If, fo r instance, one pope 
had almost eliminated the Colonna, anothe r one hostile to 
the O rsini rose up, which made the Colonna rise again, and 
the re would not be time to eliminate the O rsini. 
This b rought the tempo ral fo rces of the pope to be 
held in low esteem in Italy. Then Alexande r VI a rose;6 of all 
the pontiffs the re have eve r been he showed how fa r a pope 
could p revail with money and fo rces. With Duke Valentino 
as his inst rument and with the invasion of the F rench as the 
oppo rtunity, he did all the things I discussed above in the 
actions of the duke. And though his intent might not have 
been to make the Chu rch g reat, but rathe r the duke, none-
3. lit.: scandal. 
4. Sixtus IV (1414-84), pope from 1471 to 1484. NM said of him 
in Florentine Histories VII 22: "This pontiff was the first who began to show 
how much a pontiff could do and how many things previously called errors 
could be hidden under pontifical authority. " 
5. See NM, Florentine Histories I 23 (end). 
6. NM omits Innocent VIII, pope from 1484 to 1492 between 
Sixtus IV and Alexander VI (who was pope from 1492 to 1503). 

theless what he did redounded to the greatness of the 
Church. After his death, the duke being eliminated, the 
Church fell heir to his labors. Then came Pope Julius, and 
he found the Church great, since she had all Romagna, had 
eliminated the barons in Rome, and had annihilated those 
factions through the blows struck by 
Alexander; Julius 
found the path still open to a mode of accumulating money, 
never used before Alexander.7 These things Julius not only 
continued but increased; and he thought about how to gain 
Bologna for himself, eliminate the Venetians, and expel the 
French from Italy. 
and with all the more praise, inasmuch as he did everything 
for the increase of the Church and not of some private 
individual. He also kept the Orsini and Colonna parties 
within the same limits in which he found them; and al­
though there might be some head among them ready to 
make a change, still two things restrained them: one, the 
greatness of the Church, which frightened them; the other, 
not having cardinals of their own, for they are the origin of 
the tumults among them. Nor will these parties ever be 
quiet as long as they have cardinals; for cardinals nourish 
parties, within Rome and without, and the barons are 
forced to defend them. Thus, from the ambition of prelates 
arise disorders and tumults among the barons. His Holiness 
Pope Leo,S then, has found this ponti ficate most powerful; 
one may hope that if the others made it great with arms, he, 
with his goodness and in finite other virtues, can make it 
very great and venerable. 
7. Apparently the sale of ecclesiastical offices or indulgences. 
8. Leo X, Giovanni de' Medici, son of Lorenzo de' Medici, pope 
from 1 5 1 3  to 1 521. 
47 

GXIIH 
How Many Kinds of Military 
There Are and Concerning 
Mercenary Soldiers 
Having discoursed in particular on all the qualities of those 
principalities which at the beginning I 
about, having considered in some part the causes of their 
well-being and ill-bein , and havin shown the modes in 
which many ave sought to acquire an 
01 the ,it re­
mains for me now to 
scourse gener 
y on the offense and 
defense befitting 
that it is necessary for a prince to have f200d four:datioƂor 
himseI ; 1 otherwise he must of necessity be ruined. The 
pnllclpiIloundations that ill states have, new ones as well as 
old or mixed, are good laws and good arms. And because 
there cannot be good laws where there are not good arms, 
and where there are good arms there must be good laws, 
I 
arms. 
I 
defends his sƃre either hisC>Wn or mercenary or aliX1TIary 
or mixed. Mercenary and auxi1ia 
arms are useless and 
angerous; and if on kee s his state founded on mercenary 
arms, one will never be firm 
united, iI'fiDIt10US, wItHout dlscIptme, unfaithful; bold 
among friends, among enemies cowardly; no fear of God, 
no faith with men; ruin is postponed only as long as attack is 
postponed; and in peace you are despoiled by them, in war 
by the enemy. The cause of this is that they have no love nor 
cause to keep them in the field 
I .  See Chapter 7. 

which is not sufficient 
They do indeed want to be your soldiers2 while you are not 
making war, but when war comes, they either flee or leave. 
It should be little trouble for me to persuade anyone of this 
point, because the present ruin ofItaly is caused by nothing 
other than its having relied for a period of many years on 
mercenary arms. These arms once made some progress for 
some, and may have appeared bold among themselves; but 
when the foreigner came, they showed what they were. 
Hence Charles, king of France, was allowed to seize Italy 
with chalk.3 And he who said that our sins were the cause of 
it spoke the truth.4 But the sins were surely not those he 
believed, but the ones I have told of, and because these were 
the sins of princes, they too have suffered the punishment 
for them. 
I want to demonstrate better the failure of these arms. 
Mercenary captains are either excellent men of arms or not: 
if they are, you cannot trust them because they always as­
pire to their own greatness, either by oppressing you, who 
are their patron, or by oppressing others contrary to your 
intention; but if the captain is not virtuous, he ruins you in 
the ordinary way. And if one responds that whoever has 
arms in hand will do this, mercenary or not, I would reply 
that arms have to be employed either by a prince or by a 
republic. The prince should go in person, and perform him­
self the office of captain. The republic has to send its cit­
izens, and when it sends one who does not turn out to be a 
2. In the literal sense of " soldier"; in your pay. 
3 .  The chalk used to designate which houses would lodge French 
soldiers along their unresisted invasion route; the expression is attributed 
to Pope Alexander VI by the French historian Philippe de Cornrnines in 
his Memoirs. 
4. This was Savonarola in his sermon of November I, 1494, who 
said that the French invasion was God's punishment ofItaly and Florence. 
See Discourses on Livy I II, 45, 56 for more ofNM on Savonarola, and I 
21; II 18 on the sins of Italian princes. 
49 

And by experience one sees that only princes and armed 
republics make very great progress; nothing but harm ever 
comes from mercenary arms. And a republic armed with its 
own arms is brought to obey one of its citizens with more 
difficulty 
Rome and Sparta stood for many centuries armed and 
free. The Swiss are very well armed and very free. 
Carthaginians are an example of ancient mercenary arms; 
they were nearly oppressed by their own mercenary sol­
diers at the end of the first 
though the Carthaginians had their own citizens as heads.6 
After the death of Eparninondas, Philip of Macedon was 
made captain of their troops by the Thebans; and after his 
victory he took their liberty from them.7 The Milanese, 
after Duke Filippo died, hired Francesco Sforza against the 
Venetians; when he had overcome the enemy at Caravag­
gio, he joined with them to oppress the Milanese, his pa­
trons.s Sforza's father, in the hire of Queen Giovanna ofNa­
pIes, at a stroke left her disarmed; then, so as not to lose the 
kingdom, she was compelled to throw herself in the lap of 
the king of Aragon.9 And, if the Venetians and the floren­
tines have in the past increased their empire with these arms, 
and their captains did not thereupon make themselves 
princes but defended them, I respond that the Florentines 
5. lit.: external 
6. The Mercenary War at the end of the First Punic War, 241-237 
B.C. 
7. After Epaminondas's death in 362 B.C., Philip (who does not 
appear to have been a mercenary captain) became king of Macedon in 359 
and occupied Thebes in 338. 
8 .  The battle of Caravaggio took place in 1448; see NM's fuller 
account of Sforza's successful maneuver in Florentine Histories VI 18-22. 
9. Muzio Attendolo Sforza (1369-1424); see Florentine Histories I 
50 

were favored by chance in this case, because, of the virtuous 
captains whom they could have feared, some did not win, 
some had opposition, others turned their ambition else­
where. The one who did not win was Giovanni Acuto.1o 
Since he did not win, one could not know his faith, but 
everyone will confess that if he had won, the Florentines 
would have been at his discretion. Sforza always had the 
Bracceschi11 against him, so that each watched the other: 
Francesco turned his ambition to Lombardy, Braccio against 
the Church and the kingdom of Naples. 
But let us come to what happened a little while ago. 
The Florentines took as their captain Paolo Vitelli, a most 
prudent man who from private fortune had secured very 
great reputation. If he had captured Pisa, no one would 
deny that the Florentines would have had to stay with him, 
because if he had gone over in hire to their enemies, they 
would have had no remedy; and if they had kept him, they 
would have had to obey him. If one considers the progress 
of the Venetians, one will see that they acted securely and 
gloriously while they themselves made war (which 
fore they turned to enterprises on land). 
gentry and armed plebs, they performed most virtuously, 
but when they began to fight 
behind and they followed the customs of wars in Italy. And 
at the beginning of their expansion on land, because they 
did not have much of a state there and because they were 
held in great repute, they did not have much to fear from 
their captains; but as they expanded, which was under Car­
magnola, 12 they suffered an instance of this error. For when 
they saw he was most virtuous, since the duke of Milan had 
10. NM's rendering of the name of the English mercenary captain 
John Hawkwood. 
I I. Mercenaries of Andrea Fortebraccio, also known as Braccio da 
Montone; see Florentine Histories I 38, V 2. 
12. Francesco di Bussone. count of Car mag nola (cI38o-1432); see 
Discourses on Livy II 18. 
51 

been defeated by them under his government, and when 
they learned on the other hand that he had turned cool 
toward the war, they judged they could no longer win with 
him because he did not want to, nor could they dismiss him 
without losing what they had acquired. So in order to secure 
themselves, they were forced of necessity to kill him. Then 
they had as their captains Bartolomeo da Bergamo, Roberto 
da San Severino, the count of Pitigliano,13 
these they had to fear for loss, not for their gain, as then 
happened at Vaili: there they lost in one day what they had 
acquired with such trouble in eight hundred years. For 
these arms bring only slow, late, and weak acquisitions, 
but sudden and miraculous losses. And because with these 
examples I have come into Italy, which has been governed 
for many years by mercenary arms, I want to discourse on 
them more deeply, so that, when their origin and progress 
have been seen, one can correct them better. 
So you 14 have to understand that in recent times as 
soon as Italy began to repel the empire, and the pope gained 
much reputation in temporal affairs, Italy divided into 
many states. For many of the large cities took up arms 
against their nobles, who formerly, supported by the em­
peror, had kept them under oppression; and the Church 
supported the cities to give herself reputation in temporal 
affairs. In many other cities their citizens became princes 
over them. Hence, since Italy had almost fallen into the 
hands of the Church and a few republics, and since the 
priests and the other citizens did not have knowledge of 
arms, they began to hire foreigners. The first who gave 
reputation to this kind of military was Alberigo da Conio, 
1 3. Bartolomeo Colleoni, commander of the Venetian troops at 
Caravaggio (1448); Roberto da San Severino, commanding in the war 
against Fertara (1482-84); Niccolo Orsini, count ofPitigliano, command­
ing at the battle of"VaiJa" (Vailate) in 15 09. See Discourses on Livy I 6, 5 3; 
III 3!. 
\ 
14. The formal or plural you. 
52 

from Romagna.15 From his discipline came, among others, 
Braccio and Sforza, who in their times were the arbiters of 
Italy. After them came all the others who have governed 
these arms until our times. And the result of their virtue has 
been that Italy has been overrun by Charles, taken as booty 
by Louis, violated by Ferdinand, and insulted by the Swiss. 
The order they have held to has been, first, 
reputation from the infantry in order to give reputation to 
themselves. They did this because they were men without a 
state who lived on industry. Having a few infantry did not 
give them reputation and they could not feed very many; so 
they were left with horse, and were fed and honored in 
tolerable number. And things came to the point that in an 
army of twenty thousand soldiers not two thousand infan­
try were to be found. Besides this, they had used all their 
industry to rid themselves and the soldiers of trouble and 
fear by not killing one another in battles but taking pris­
oners without asking ransom. They did not go against 
towns in the night; those in the towns would not go against 
their tents; around the camp they made neither stockade nor 
trench; they did not campaign in winter. And 
all these 
things were permitted in their military orders and dis­
covered by them, as has been said, so as to escape trouble 
and dangers, so that they have led 16 Italy into slavery and 
disgrace. 
1 5 .  Alberigo da Barbiano, count of Conio, died in 1409; on his 
Company of St. George, see NM, Florentine Histories I 34. 
16. condotta, a pun on the contract (condotta) by which a condottiere 
is hired. 
53 

GXIIIH 
Of Auxiliary, Mixed, and One's 
Own Soldiers 
Auxiliary arms, which are the other useless arms, are those 
of a power that is called to come with its arms to help and 
defend you, as was done by Pope Julius in recent times. 
When he had seen in the campaign of Ferrara the sad result 
of his mercenary arms, he turned to auxiliary ones; and he 
agreed with Ferdinand, king of 
Spain, that 
Ferdinand 
would help him with his men and armies. These arms can 
be useful and good in themselves, but for whoever calls 
them in, they are almost always harmful, because when 
they lose you are undone; when they win, you are left their 
prisoner. And although ancient histories are full of exam­
ples, nonetheless I do not wish to depart from this recent 
example of Pope Julius II, whose course of thrusting himself 
entirely into the hands of a foreigner, when he wanted 
Ferrara, could not have been less thought out. But his good 
fortune gave rise to a third thing so that he did not reap the 
fruit of his bad choice; for when his auxiliaries were defeated 
at Ravenna, 1 the Swiss rose up and, beyond all expec­
tation, his own and others, drove out the victors; and he 
came out a prisoner neither of his enemies, who had fled, 
nor of his auxiliaries, since he had won with other arms 
than theirs. The Florentines, who were entirely unarmed, 
brought in ten thousand French to Pisa to capture it,2 for 
which course they incurred more danger than in any other 
time of their travails. The emperor of Constantinople, so as 
to oppose his neighbors, sent ten thousand 
Turks into 
Greece; when the war was finished, they refused to leave.3 
r. In I5I2· 
2. In 1500. 
3. EmperorJohn Cantacuzene, in 1 3 5 3· 
54 

This was the beginning of the servitude of Greece under 
the in fidels. 
Let him, then, who wants to be unable to win make 
use of these arms, since they are much more dangerous than 
mercenary arms. For with these, ruin is accomplished; they 
are all united, all resolved to obey someone else. But merce­
nary arms, when they have won, need more time and 
greater opportunity to hurt you, since they are not one 
whole body and have been found and paid for by you. In 
them the third party whom you may put at their head 
cannot quickly seize so much authority as to offend you. 
In sum, in mercenary arms laziness is more dangerous; in 
auxiliary arms, virtue is. 
A wise prince, therefore, has always avoided these arms 
and turned to his own. He has preferred to lose with his own 
than to win with others, since he judges it no true victory 
that is acquired with alien arms. I shall never hesitate to 
cite Cesare Borgia and his actions. This duke came into 
Romagna with auxiliary arms, leading there entirely French 
troops, with whom he took Imola and Forli. But when 
such arms no longer appeared safe to him, he turned to 
mercenaries, judging there to be less danger in them; and he 
hired the Orsini and Vitelli. Then in managing them, he 
found them doubtful, unfaithful, and dangerous; he elimi­
nated them, and turned to his own arms. And one can easily 
see the difference between these arms if one considers what 
a difference there was in the reputation of the duke when 
he had only the French, and when he had the Orsini and 
Vitelli, and when he was left with his own soldiers and 
himself over them: his reputation will be found always to 
have increased, but he was never so much esteemed as when 
everyone saw that he was the total owner of his arms. 
I did not want to depart from examples that are Italian 
and recent; yet I do not want to leave out Hiero of Syracuse, 
since he was one of those named above by me. 4 When he, as 
4. In Chapter 6. 
55 

I said, was made head of the arm y b y  the S yracusans, he 
knew immediatel y that their mercenar y militar y was not 
useful because the y were condottieri set up like our Italians. 
Since he thought he could neither keep them nor let them 
go, he had them a l cut to pieces, and then made war with 
his arms and not with alien arms. I want further to recal l to 
memory a figure of the Old Testament apt for this purpose. 
When David offered to Saul to go and f lght Goliath, the 
Philistine cha llenger, Saul, to give him spirit, armed him 
with his own arms -which David, as soon as he had them 
on, refused, sa ying that with them he could not give a good 
account of himsel f, and so he would rather meet the enem y 
with his sling and his knife. 5 
In 
fine, the arms of others either fa ll off your back or 
weigh you down or hold you tight. Charles V II, father of 
King Louis XI, who had liberated France from the English 
with his fortune and virtue, recognized this necessit y of 
arming himself with his own arms, and laid down 6 an ordi­
nance in his kingdom for men -at -arms and infantry. Then 
his son King Louis eliminated the ordinance for infantr y 
and began to hire Swiss; this error, continued b y  others, is, 
as one sees now in fact, the cause of the dangers to that 
kingdom . For when he gave reputation to the Swiss, he 
debased all his own arms, because he had elim inated the 
infantr y entirel y and he had obligated his men-at-arms to 
the arms of others. For after the y had become accustomed 
to fighting with Swiss, the y did not think the y could win 
without them. From this it fo llows that French are not 
enough against Swiss and without Swiss do not try against 
an yone else. Thus, the armies of France have been mixed, 
part mercenar y and part their own. These arms a ll together 
are much better than simple auxiliar y or simple mercenary 
5 .  NM's account of this episode differs significantly from the biblical 
original in I Samuel IT 3 8-40, 50-5 1 .  
6 .  lit.: ordered. 

arms, but much inferior to one 's own. And the example 
given is enough, because the kingdom of France would be 
unconquerable if the ordering of Charles had been ex ­
panded or preserved. But lack of prudence in men begins 
something in which, because it tastes good then, they do 
not perceive the poison that lies underneath, as I said above 
of consumptive fevers. 7 
Therefore, he who does not recognize evils when they 
arise in a principality is not truly wise, and this is given to 
few. And if one considers the first 
Roman Empire, one will find 
hiring of Goths, because from that beginning the forces of 
the Roman Empire began to weaken, and all the virtue that 
was taken from it was given to them. 
I conclude , thus, that without its own arms no princi­
pality is secure; indeed it is wholly obliged to fortune since it 
does not have virtue to defend itself 8 in adversity. And it has 
always been the opinion and judgment of wise men "that 
nothing is so in firm and unstable as fame for power not 
sustained by one 's own force."9 And one 's own arms are 
those which a re composed of either sub jects or citizens or 
your creatures : all others are either mercenary or auxiliary. 
And the mode of ordering one 's own arms will be easy to 
find 
above ! !  and if one sees how Philip, father of Alexander the 
Great, and how many republics and princes have armed and 
ordered themselves. I submit myself entirely to these orders. 
7. In Chapter 3 ,  where NM referred to diseases, not to remedies. 
8. One manuscript has "with faith" at this point. 
9. Quoted by NM in Latin from Tacitus, Annals XIII. 19; the 
words rerum mortalium ("of mortal things") have been omitted by NM 
after "nothing." 
10. lit. : discourses on. 
I ! .  The four named in this chapter are Cesare Borgia, Hiero, David, 
and Charles VII. In Chapter 6 NM mentions Moses, Cyrus, Romulus, 
and Theseus. 
57 

GXIVH 
What a Prince Should Do 
Regarding the Military 
Thus, a pr ince should h ave no other ob ject, nor any other 
thought, nor t ake anyth ing else as h is art but th at o f  
w ar and 
its orders and d isc ipl ine; for th at is the only art wh ich is o f  
concern to one who comm ands. And it is o f  
such v irtue th at 
not only does it m aint ain those who h ave been born pr inces 
but m any t imes it en ables men o f  
pr iv ate fortune to r ise to 
th at r ank; and on the contr ary, one sees th at when pr inces 
h ave thought more o f  amen it ies th an o f  arms, they h ave lost 
the ir st ates . And the first 
neglect o f  
th is art; and the c ause th at en ables you to acqu ire 
it is to be a pro fess ion al in th is art . 
Fr ancesco S forz a, bec ause he w as armed, bec ame duke 
o f  M il an from a pr iv ate ind iv idu al; and h is sons, bec ause 
they sh unned the h ardsh ips o f  arms, bec ame pr iv ate ind iv id­
u als from dukes. I For, among the other c auses o f  
ev il th at 
be ing un armed br ings you, it m akes you contempt ible, 
wh ich is one o f  
those in fam ies the pr ince should be on gu ard 
ag ainst, as w ill be s aid below. For there is no proport ion 
between one who is 
armed and one who is un armed, and 
it 
is not re ason able th at whoever is 
armed obey w ill ingly 
whoever is un armed, and th at someone un armed be secure 
among armed serv ants. For s ince there is scorn in the one 
and susp ic ion in the other, it is not poss ib le for them to work 
well together. And there fore a pr ince who does not un­
derst and the m il it ary, bes ides other unh app iness, c annot, as 
w as s aid, be esteemed by h is sold iers nor h ave trust in them. 
I .  Francesco Sforza's "sons" (rather, his descendants) were Galeazzo 
Maria, murdered in 1476; Gian Galeazzo, deposed by his uncle Ludovico 
il Moro in J 480; and Ludovico il Moro, deposed in 1500. The emperor 
Maximilian I, deposed in 1 5 1 5 ,  may perhaps be included. 
5 8 

Therefore, he should never lift his thoughts from the 
exercise of war, a nd i n  peace he should exercise it more 
tha n i n  war. This he ca n do i n  two modes, o ne with dee ds, 
the other with the mi nd. A nd as to deeds, besides keepi ng 
his armies well ordered a nd exer cised, he should always 
be out hu nti ng, a nd through this accustom the body to 
hardships; a nd mea nwhi le he should le ar n  the nature of 
sites, a nd recog nize how mou ntai ns rise, how valleys ope n 
up, how plai ns lie, a nd u ndersta nd the nature of rivers a nd 
marshes -a nd i n  this i nvest the greatest care. This k nowl ­
edge is useful i n  two modes. First, o ne lear ns to k now o ne 's 
ow n cou ntry, a nd o ne ca n better u ndersta nd its defe nse; 
the n, through the k nowledge of a nd experie nce with those 
sites, o ne c an comprehe nd with ease every other site that 
it may be necessary to explore2 as new. For the hil ls, the 
valleys, the plai ns, the rivers, a nd the marshes that are i n  
Tusca ny, for example, have a certai n similarity to those of 
other provi nces, so that from the k nowledge of a site i n  
o ne 
provi nce o ne ca n easily come to the k nowledge of others. 
A nd the pri nce who lacks this skil l lacks the first 
a captai n mu st have, for this teache s him to find the e nemy, 
seize lodgi ngs, lead armies, order battles, a nd besiege tow ns 
to your adva ntage.3 
Amo ng other praise give n by writers to Philopoeme n, 
pri nce of the Achaea ns,4 is that i n  times of peace he never 
thought of a nythi ng but modes of war; a nd wh en he was o n  
campaig n with frie nds, he ofte n stopped a nd reaso ned with 
them: "If the e nemy were o n  top of that hill a nd we were 
here with our army, which of us would have the adva ntage ? 
How could o ne adva nce to meet them while mai ntai ni ng 
2. lit.: speculate on. 
3. On knowledge of the nature of sites as "science," see Discourses 
on Livy III 39; and see the Dedicatory Letter above. 
4· Philopoemen (253-183 B.C.), a head of the Achaean League. 
The writers who praise him are Livy (XXXV.28) and Plutarch (Life of 
Philopoemen, 4). 
59 

order ? If we 
wanted to retreat from here, ho w would we 
have to do it ? If they retreated, ho w would we have to follo w 
them ?" And he put before them, as he went along, all the 
chances that can occur to an army; he listened to their 
opinions, gave his o wn, supported it with reasons, so that 
because of these continued cogitations there could never 
arise, while he led the army, any accident for which he did 
not have the remedy. 
But, as to the exercise of the mind, a prince should read 
histories and consider in them the actions of excellent men, 
should see ho w they conducted themselves in wars, should 
examine the causes of their victories and losses, so as to be 
able to avoid the latter and imitate the former. Above all he 
should do as some excellent man has done in the past who 
found someone to imitate who had been praised and glori­
fied 
beside himsel f, as they say Alexander the Great imitated 
Achi lles; Caesar, Alexander ; Scipio, Cyrus. And whoever 
reads the life of Cyrus written by Xenophon 5 will then 
recognize in the life of Scipio ho w much glory that imita­
tion brought him, ho w much in chastity, affability, human­
ity, and liberality Scipio conformed to what had been writ ­
ten of Cyrus by Xenophon. 
A wise prince should observe such modes, and never 
remain idle in peaceful times, but with his industry make 
capital of them in order to be able to pro fit from them in 
adversities, so that when fortune changes, it will find him 
ready to resist them. 
5. The title of Xenophon's book is actually Cyropaideia, "The 
Education of Cyrus." 
60 

xv 
Of Those Things for Which Men 
And Especially Princes Are 
Praised or Blamed 
It remains now to see what the modes and government of a 
prince should be with sub jects and with friends. And be­
cause I know that many have written of this, I fear that in 
writing of it again, I may be held presumptuous, especially 
since in disputing this matter I depart from the orders of 
others. But since my intent is to write something useful to 
whoever understands it, it has appeared to me more fitting 
to go directly to the effectual truth of the thing than to the 
imagination of it. And many have imagined republics and 
principalities that have never been seen or known to exist in 
truth; for it is so far from how one lives to how one should 
live that he who lets go of what is done for what should be 
done learns his ruin rather than his preservation. For a man 
who wants to make a profession of good in all regards must 
come to ruin among so many who are not good. Hence it is 
necessary to a prince, if he wants to maintain himsel f, to 
learn to be able not to be good, and to use this and not use it 
according to necessity. 
Thus, leaving out what is imagined about a prince and 
discussing what is true, I say that all men, whenever one 
speaks of them, and especially princes, since they are placed 
higher, are noted for some of the qualities that bring them 
either blame or praise. And this is why someone is consid­
ered liberal, someone mean (using 
avaro [avaricious ] in our language is still one who desires to 
have something by rapine, misero [mean ] we call one who 
re frains 
sidered a giver, someone rapacious; someone cr uel, some-
61 

one me rciful; 1 the one a b reake r of faith , the othe r faithful ; 
the one effeminate and pusillanim ous , the othe r fie rce and 
spi rited ; the one humane , the othe r p roud; the one lascivi­
ous , the othe r chaste; the one h onest , the othe r astute; the 
one ha rd ,  th e othe r a greeable;2 the one grave , the othe r 
li ght; the one reli gi ous , the othe r unbelievin g, and the like. 
And I kn ow that eve ry one will c onfess that it would be a 
ve ry p raise worthy thin g t o  find 
menti oned qualities that a re held good. But because he 
cann ot have them , n or wh olly 3 obse rve them , since human 
c onditi ons d o  n ot pe rmit it , it is necessa ry f or him t o  be s o  
p rudent as t o  kn ow h ow t o  av oid the infamy of th ose vices 
that would take his state f rom him and t o  
be on gua rd a gainst 
th ose that d o  n ot ,  if that is p ossible; but if one cann ot ,  one 
can let them go on 
with less hesitati on. And fu rthe rm ore 
one sh ould n ot ca re ab out incu rrin g the fame 4 of th ose vices 
with out which it is difficult t o  save one 's state ; f or if one 
c onside rs eve rythin g we ll , one will find 
t o  be vi rtue , which if pu rsued would be one 's 
ruin , and 
s omethin g else appea rs t o  be vice , which if pu rsued results 
in one 's secu rity and well -bein g. 
I .  pietoso has a connotation of "pious." 
2. lit.: easy. 
3. Or honestly. 
4. Some manuscripts have infamia, "infamy. " 
GXVIH 
Of Liberality and Parsimony 
Be ginnin g, then , with the first of the ab ove-menti oned 
qualities , I s ay that it would be good t o  be held libe ral; 
n onetheless , libe rality , when used s o  that y ou may be held 
62 

liberal, hurts 1 you. For if it is used virtuously and as it should 
be used, it may not be recognized, and you will not escape 
the infamy of its contrary. And so, if one wants to maintain a 
name for liberality among men, it is necessary not to leave 
out any kind of lavish display, so that a prince who has done 
this will always consume all his resources in such deeds. In 
the end it will be necessary, if he wants to maintain a name 
for liberality, to burden the people extraordinarily, to be 
rigorous with taxes, and to do all those things that can be 
done to get money. This will begin to make him hated by his 
sub jects, and little esteemed by anyone as he beco mes poor; 
so having offended the many and rewarded the few with this 
liberality of his, he feels every least hardship and runs into 
risk at every slight danger. When he recognizes this, and 
wants to draw back from it, he immediately incurs the 
infamy of meanness. 
Thus, since a prince cannot, without damage to him ­
self, use the virtue of liberality so that it is recognized, he 
should not, if he is prudent, care about a name for meanness . 
For with time he will always be held more and more liberal 
when it is seen that with his parsimony his income is enough 
for him, that he can defend himself from whoever makes 
war on him, and that he can undertake campaigns without 
burdening the people. So he comes to use liberality with all 
those from whom he does not take , who are in finite, and 
meanness with all those to whom he does not give, who 
are few. In our times we have not seen great things done 
except by those who have been considered mean; the others 
have been eliminated . Pope Julius I I, while he made use 
of a name for liberality to attain the papacy, did not think of 
maintaining it later, so as to be able to make war. The pres ­
ent king of France2 has carried on many wars without 
imposing an extraordinary tax on his sub jects, only because 
1 .  lit.: offends. 
2. Louis XII. 

the extra expenses were administered with his long ­
practiced parsimony. If the present king of Spain 3 had been 
held liberal, he would not have been able to make or win so 
many campa igns. 
Therefore, so as not to have to rob his sub jects, to be 
able to defend himself, not to become poor and contempt­
ible, nor to be forced to become rapacious, a prince should 
esteem it little to incur a name for meanness, because this is 
one of those vices which enable him to rule. And if someone 
should say : Caesar attained empire with liberality, and many 
others, because they have been and have been held to be 
liberal, have attained very great rank, I respond: either you 
are already a prince or you are on the path to acquiring it : in 
the first case this liberality is damaging; in the second it is 
indeed necessary to be held liberal . And Caesar was one of 
those who wanted to attain the principate of Rome; but if 
after he had arrived there, had he remained alive and not 
been temperate with his expenses, he would have destroyed 
that empire. And if someone should reply : many have been 
princes and have done great things with their armies who 
have been held very liberal, I respond to you : either the 
prince spends from what is his own and his sub jects' or from 
what belongs to someone else. In the first case he should be 
sparing; in the other, he should not leave out any part of 
liberality. And for the prince who goes out with his armies, 
who feeds on booty, pillage, and ransom and manages on 
what belongs to someone else, this liberality is necessary; 
othe rwise he would not be followed by his soldiers. And of 
what is not yours or your sub jects ' one can be a bigger giver, 
as were Cyrus, Caesar, and Alexander, because spend­
ing what is someone else 's does not take reputation from 
you but adds it to you; only spending your own is what 
harms you. And there is nothing that consumes itself as 
much as liberality : while you use it, you lose the capacity to 
3. Ferdinand the Catholic. 

use it; and you become eithe r poo r and contemptible o r, to 
escape pove rty, rapacious and hateful. Among all the things 
that a p rince should gua rd against is being contemptible and 
hated, and libe rality leads you to both. So the re is mo re 
wisdom in ma intaining a name fo r meanness, which begets 
infamy without hat red, than in being unde r a necessity, 
because one wants to have a name fo r libe rality, to incu r a 
name fo r rapacity, which begets infamy with hat red. 
GXVIIH 
Of Cruelty and Mercy, l and 
Whether It Is Better to Be Loved 
Than Feared, or the Contrary 
Descending next to the othe r qualities cited befo re, I say 
that each p rince should desi re to be held me rc iful and not 
c ruel; nonetheless he should take ca re not to use this me rcy 
badly. Cesa re Bo rgia was held to be c ruel; nonetheless his 
c ruelty resto red the Romagna, united it, and reduced it to 
peace and to fa ith. If one conside rs this well, one will see 
that he was much mo re me rci ful than the Flo rentine people, 
who so as to escape a name fo r c ruelty, allo wed Pistoia to be 
dest royed.2 A p rince, the refo re, so as to keep his sub jects 
united and faithful, should not ca re about the infamy of 
c ruelty, because with ve ry fe w examples he will be mo re 
me rc iful than those who fo r the sake of too much me rcy 
allo w diso rde rs to continue, f rom wh ich come killings o r  
I .  Or piety, throughout The Prince. 
2. From 1500 to 1502 Pistoia, a city subject to Florence, was torn 
by factional disputes and riots. NM was there as representative of the 
Florentines on several occasions in I SO I .  

ro bber ies ; for these custom ar ily hurt } a whole commun ity,4 
but the e xe cut ions th at come from the pr in ce hurtS one 
p art icul ar person . And of all pr in ces, it 
is 
imposs ible for the 
new pr in ce to es cap e  a n ame for cruelty be cause new st ates 
are full of d angers. And V irg il s ays in the mouth of D ido : 
"The h arshness of th ings and the newness of the k ingdom 
compel me to contr ive su ch th ings, and to keep a bro ad 
w at ch over the borders." 6 
Nonetheless, he should be slow to bel ieve and to 
move, nor should he m ake h imself fe ared, and he should 
pro ceed in 
a temper ate mode w ith pruden ce 
and hum an ity 
so th at too mu ch con fiden
and too mu ch d iffiden ce does not render h im intoler able. 
From th is a d ispute arises whether it 
is 
better to be 
loved th an fe ared, or the reverse. The response is th at one 
would w ant to be both the one and the other; but be cause it 
is d ifficult to put them together, it 
is mu ch s afer to be fe ared 
th an loved, if one h as to l ack one of the two. For one can 
s ay th is gener ally of men : th at they are ungr ateful, fi
pretenders and d issem blers, ev aders of d anger, e ager for 
g ain. Wh ile you do them good, they are yours, offer ing you 
the ir 
blood, property, l ives, and ch ildren, as I s aid 
above,7 
when the need for them is f ar aw ay; but, when it 
is 
close to 
you, they revolt. And th at pr in ce who h as founded h imself 
ent irely on the ir words, str ipped of other prep ar at ion, is 
ru ined; for fr iendsh ips th at are acqu ired at 
a pr ice and not 
w ith gre atness and no bil ity of sp ir it are bought, but they are 
not owned and when the t ime comes they cannot be spent. 
And men h ave less hes it at ion to offend one who m akes 
h imse lf loved th an one who m akes h imself fe ared; for love is 
held by 
a ch ain of o bl ig at ion, wh ich, be cause men are 
3 .  lit.: offend. 
4. lit.: a whole universality. 
5. lit.: offend. 
6. Virgil, Aeneid I 563-64. 
7. See Chapter 9· 
66 

wi cked, is b roken at eve ry oppo rtunity fo r thei r own utility, 
but fe ar is held by a d re ad of punishment th at neve r fo rs akes 
you. 
The p rin ce should nonetheless m ake himself fe ared in 
su ch a mode th at if he does not acqui re love, he es capes 
h at red, be cause bein g fe ared and not bein g h ated can go 
to gethe r ve ry well. This he will alw ays do if he abst ains f rom 
the p rope rty of his citizens and his sub je cts, and f rom thei r 
women ; and if he also needs to p ro ceed against someone 's 
life,8 he must do it when the re is suit able justi fication and 
m anifest cause fo r it. But above all, he must abst ain f rom the 
p rope rty of othe rs ,  be cause men fo rget the de ath of a f athe r 
mo re qui ckly th an the loss of a p at rimony . Fu rthe rmo re, 
causes fo r t akin g aw ay p rope rty are neve r l ackin g, and he 
who be gins to live by rapine alw ays finds cause to seize 
othe rs '  p rope rty ; and, on the cont rary, causes fo r t akin g life 9 
are rare r  and dis appe ar mo re qui ckly. 
But when the p rin ce is with his armies and h as a multi ­
tude of soldie rs unde r his gove rnment, then it is above all 
ne cess ary not to care about a n ame fo r cruelty, be cause 
without this n ame he neve r holds his army united, o r  d is ­
posed to 
any 
action. Amon g the admi rable 
actions of 
H annib al is numbe red this one : th at when he h ad a ve ry 
l arge 
army, mixed with in finite kinds of men, and h ad led it 
to fight in alien l ands, no dissension eve r arose in it, neithe r 
amon g themselves no r against the p rin ce, in b ad as well as in 
his good fo rtune. This could not h ave arisen f rom anythin g 
othe r th an his inhum an 
cruelty whi ch, to gethe r with his 
in finite vi rtues, alw ays m ade him vene rable and te rrible in 
the si ght of his soldie rs ;  and without it, his othe r vi rtues 
would not h ave sufficed to b rin g about this effe ct. And the 
w rite rs, h avin g conside red little in this, on the one h and 
admi re this action of his but on the othe r condemn the 
p rin cip al cause of it . 
8. lit.: blood. 
9. lit.: blood. 

And to see that it is true that his other virtues would 
not have been enough, one can consider Scipio, who was 
ver y rare not onl y in his times but also in the entire memor y 
of things known -whose armies in Spain rebelled against 
him. This arose from nothing but his excessive merc y, 
which ·had allowed his soldiers more license than is fitting 
for militar y discipline. Scipio 's merc y was reproved in the 
Senate b y  Fabius Maximus, who called him the corruptor of 
the Roman militar y. After the Locrians had been destro yed 
b y  a lega te of Scipio 's, the y were not avenged b y  him, nor 
was the insolence of that legate corrected -all of which 
arose from his agreeable nature, so that when someone in 
the Senate wanted to excuse him, he said that there were 
man y men who knew better how not to err than how to 
correct errors . Such a nature would in time have sullied 
Scipio's fame and glor y if he had continued with it in the 
empire; but while he lived under the government of the 
Senate, this damaging qualit y of his not onl y was hidden, 
but made for his glor y. 1 0  
I conclude, then, returning to being feared and loved, 
that since men love at their convenience and fear at the 
convenience of the prince, a wise prince should found him­
self on what is his, not on what is someone else 's; he should 
onl y contrive to avoid hatred, as was said. 
10. On the comparison between Hannibal and Scipio, see also 
Discourses on Livy III 19-2 I .  NM's source is in Livy, XXIX 19, 2 I .  
GXVIIIH 
In What Mode Faith Should Be 
Kept by Princes 
How praiseworth y it is for a prince to keep his faith, and to 
live with honest y and not b y  astuteness, ever yone under-
68 

stands. Nonetheless one sees b y  exper ience in our t imes that 
the pr inces who have done great th ings are those who have 
taken l ittle account of fa ith and have known how to get 
around men 's bra ins w ith the ir astuteness; and in the end 
the y have overcome those who have founded themselves 
on lo yalt y. 
Thus, you 1 must know that there are two k inds of 
combat: one w ith laws, the other w ith force. The first 
proper to man, the second to beasts; but because the first is 
often not enough, one must have recourse to the second. 
Therefore it 
is necessar y for a pr ince to know well how to 
use the beast and the man. Th is role was taught covertl y to 
pr inces b y  anc ient wr iters, who wrote that Ach illes, and 
man y other anc ient pr inces, were g iven to Ch iron the cen­
taur to be ra ised, so that he would look after them w ith h is 
d isc ipl ine. To have as teacher a half-beast, half -man means 
noth ing other th an that a pr ince needs to know how to use 
both natures; and the one w ithout the other is 
i1
ot last ing . 
Thus, s ince a pr ince is compelled of n cess ity 
0 
know well how to use the beast, he should p ic 
the fo 

 t1,*,f1/ because t he l ion does not defend it 	elf from 
Ƅnares a a the fox does not defend itself from wolves. So 
one needs to be a 
to recogn ize snares and a Il ion to 
frighten the wolves. Those who sta y s impl y w ith the l ion 
do not understand th is. A prudent lord, therefore, cannot 
observe fa ith, nor should he, when such observance turns 
aga inst h im, and the causes that made h im prom ise have 
been el im inated. And if 
all men were good, th is teach ing 
would not be good; but because the y are w icked and do 
not observe fa ith w ith you, you also do not have to ob­
ser ve it w ith them . Nor does a pr ince ever lack leg it imate 
causes to color h is fa ilure to obser ve fa ith. One could g ive 
in fin ite modern examples of th is, and show how man y 
peace treat ies and prom ises have been rendered inval id and 
1 .  The fonnal or plural you. 
2. A possible source for this: Cicero, De Officiis I. 1 1 .34; 1 3 .4 1 .  

vain thro ugh the in fide lity of princes ; and the one who has 
known best how to use the fo x has come o ut best. B ut it is 
necessary to know we ll how to co lor this nat ure, and to be a 
great pretender and dissemb ler ; and men are so simp le and 
so obedient to present necessities that he who deceives wi ll 
a lways find someone who wi ll let himse lf be deceived. 
I do not want to be si lent abo ut one of the recent 
e xamp les. Ale xander 
VI never did anything, nor ever 
tho ught of anything, b ut how to deceive men, and he a lways 
fo und a s ub ject to whom he co uld do it. And there never 
was a man with greater efficacy 
in affirming it with greater oaths, who observed it less ; 
nonethe less, his deceits s ucc eeded at his wi ll, beca use he 
we ll knew this aspect of the wor ld. 
Th us, it is not necessary for a prince to have a ll the 
above -m entioned q ua lities in fact, b ut it is indeed necessary 
to appear to have them. Nay, I dare say this, that by having 
them and a lways observing t hem, they are harmf ul; and by 
appearing to have them, they are usef ul, as it is to appear 
mercif ul, faithf ul, h umane, honest, and re ligio us, and to be 
so; b ut to remain with a spirit b ui lt so that, if yo u need not to 
be those things, yo u are ab le and know how to change to the 
contrary. This has to be understood : that a prince, and 
especia lly a new prince, cannot observe a ll those things for 
which men are he ld good, since he is often under a necessity, 
to maintain his state, of acting against faith, against charity, 
against h umanity, against re ligion. And so he needs to have a 
spirit disposed to change as the winds of fort une and varia­
tions of things command him, and as I said above, not depart 
from good, when possib le, b ut know how to enter into evi l, 
when forced by necessity. 
A prince sho uld th us take great care that nothing es­
cape his mo uth that is not f ull of the above-mentioned five 
q ua lities and that, to see him and hear him, he sho uld appear 
a ll mercy, a ll faith, a ll honesty, a ll h umanity, all re ligion. 
And nothing is more necessary to appear to have than this 
70 

many times. 
3 .  lit.: universally. 
4. lit.: touches. 
5. One manuscript says "the few have no place there . . .  
"; and the 
authorities have divided, Casella, Russo, and Sasso accepting "no place," 
Chabod and Bertelli "a place." 
6. Apparently Ferdinand the Catholic, whom NM unhesitatingly 
names in Chapter 2 I .  
GXIXH 
Of Avoiding Contempt and 
Hatred 
/ 
But be cause I have spoken of the most impo rtant of the 
qualities mentioned above, I want to dis cou rse on the othe rs 
b rie fly unde r this gene rality, that the p rin ce, as was said 
above in pa rt, should think how to avoid those things that 
7 1  

make him hateful and contemptible. When he avoids them, 
he will have done his part and will find no danger in his 
other infamies. What makes him hated above all, as I said, 1 is 
to be rapacious and a usurper of the property and the women 
of his subjects. From these he must abstain, and whenever 
one does not take away either property or honor from the 
generality2 of men, they live content and one has only to 
combat the ambition of the few which may be checked in 
many modes and with ease. What makes him contemptible 
is to be held variable, light, effeminate, pusillanimous, irres­
olute, from which a prince should guard himself as from a 
shoal. He should contrive that greatness, spiritedness, grav­
ity, and strength are recognized in his actions, and he should 
insist that his judgments in the private concerns of his sub­
jects be irrevocable. And he should maintain such an 
opinion of himself that no one thinks either of deceiving 
him or of getting around him. 
The prince who gives this opinion of himself is highly 
reputed, and against whoever is reputed it is difficult to 
conspire, difficult to mount an attack, provided it is under­
stood that he is excellent and revered by his own subjects. 
For a prince should have two fears: one within, on account 
of his subjects; the other outside, on account of external 
powers. From the latter one is defended with good arms 
and good friends; and if one has good arms, one will always 
have good friends. And things inside will always remain 
steady, if things outside are steady, unless indeed they are 
disturbed by a conspiracy; and even if things outside are in 
motion, provided he has ordered and lived as I said, as long 
as he does not forsake himself he will always withstand 
every thrust, as I said Nabis the Spartan did.3 But, as to 
1. See Chapter 17 above. 
2. lit.: universality. 
3. Chapter 9 above, where Nabis is featured as a prince of a civil 
principality. NM does not disclose here, as he does in Discourses on Livy III 
6, that Nabis was in fact killed by a conspiracy. 
72 

subjects, when things outside are not moving, one has to 
fear that they may be conspiring secretly. From this the 
prince may secure himself sufficiently if he avoids being 
hated or despised and keeps the people satisfied with him; 
this is necessary to achieve, as was said above at length.4 
And one of the most powerful remedies that a prince has 
against conspiracies is not to be hated by the people gener­
ally.5 For whoever conspires always believes he will satisfY 
the people with the death of the prince, but when he be­
lieves he will offend them, he does not get up the spirit to 
adopt such a course, because the difficulties on the side of 
the conspirators are infinite. And one sees from experience 
that there have been many conspiracies, but few have had a 
good end. For whoever conspires cannot be alone, but he 
cannot find company except from those he believes to be 
malcontents; and as soon as you disclose your intent to a 
malcontent, you give him the matter with which to become 
content, because manifestly he can hope for every advan­
tage from it. So, seeing sure gain on this side, and on the 
other, dubious gain full of danger, he must indeed either be 
a rare friend, or an altogether obstinate enemy of the prince, 
to observe his faith with you. And to reduce this to brief 
terms, I say that on the part of the conspirator there is 
nothing but fear, jealousy, and the anticipation of terrifYing 
punishment; but on the part of the prince there is the maj­
esty of the principality, the laws, the protection of friends 
and of the state which defend him, so that when popular 
good will is added to all these things, it is impossible that 
anyone should be so rash as to conspire. For whereas a 
conspirator ordinarily has to fear before the execution of the 
evil, in this case (having the people as enemies) he must fear 
afterwards too, when the excess has occurred, nor can he 
hope for any refuge. 
4. Chapters 16, 17. 
5. lit.: by the universal. 
73 

One might give infinite examples of this matter, but I 
wish to be content with only one that happened within 
the memory of our fathers. Messer Annibale Bentivoglio, 
grandfather of the present Messer Annibale, who was 
prince in Bologna, was killed by the Canneschi conspiring 
against him, and no one survived him but Messer Giovanni, 
who was in swaddling clothes. Immediately after that homi­
cide the people rose up and killed all the Canneschi. This 
came from the popular good will the house of Bentivoglio 
had in those times, which was so great that since there 
remained no one of that house in Bologna who could rule 
the state, Annib;,le being dead, and since there was indica­
tion that in Florence someone had been born of the Ben­
tivogli who was considered until then the son of a black­
smith, the Bolognese came to Florence for him and gave 
him the government of their city, which was governed by 
him until Messer Giovanni reached an age suitable for gov­
erning.6 
I conclude, therefore, that a prince should take little 
account of conspiracies if the people show good will to him; 
but if they are hostile and bear hatred for him, he should fear 
everything and everyone. And well-ordered states and wise 
princes have thought out with all diligence how not to make 
the great desperate and how to satisfy the people and keep 
them content, because this is one of the most important 
matters that concern a prince. 
Among the well-ordered and governed kingdoms in 
our times is that of France;7 and in it are infinite good 
institutions on which the liberty and security of the king 
depend. The first of these is the parlement and its authority. 
For the one who ordered that kingdom,S knowing the am-
6. See NM, Florentine Histories VI 9-IO. 
7. On the kingdom of France, see also Discourses on Livy 1 16, 17, 
55; and NM's Rifratto di cose di Francia. 
8. Perhaps a reference to Louis IX, by whom the Parlement of Paris 
was organized out of the preceding king's court. Parlements in the French 
monarchy were law courts, not legislative assemblies. 
74 

bition of the powerful and their insolence, and judging it 
necessary for them to have a bit in their mouths to correct 
them, and on the other side, knowing the hatred of the 
generality of people9 against the great, which is founded in 
its fear, and wanting to secure them, intended this not to be 
the particular concern of the king, so as to take from him the 
blame he would have from the great when he favored the 
popular side, and from the popular side when he favored the 
great; and so he constituted a third judge to be the one who 
would beat down the great and favor the lesser side without 
blame for the king. This order could not be better, or more 
prudent, or a greater cause of the security of the king and 
the kingdom. From this one can infer another notable thing: 
that princes should have anything blameable administered 
by others, favorslO by themselves. Again I conclude that a 
prince should esteem the great, but not make himself hated 
by the people. 
It might perhaps appear to many, considering the life 
and death of some Roman emperor, that there were ex­
amples contrary to my opinion, since one may find some­
one who has always lived excellently, and shown great vir­
tue of spirit, and has nonetheless lost the empire or indeed 
been killed by his own subjects who conspired against him. 
Since I want, therefore, to respond to these objections, 
I shall discuss the qualities of certain emperors, showing 
the causes of their ruin to be not unlike that which I 
have advanced; and in part I shall offer for consideration 
things that are notable for whoever reads about the actions 
of those times. And I want it to suffice for me to take all the 
emperors who succeeded to the empire, from Marcus the 
philosopher to Maxirninus: these were Marcus, Comrnodus 
his son, Pertinax, Julianus, Severus, his son Antoninus 
Caracal1a, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, Alexander,11 and Max-
9. lit.: of the universal. 
10. lit.: things of grace. 
11. Alexander Severns. 
75 

iminus. And first it is to be noted that whereas in other 
principalities one has to contend only with the ambition 
of the great and the insolence of the people, the Roman 
emperors had a third difficulty, of having to bear with the 
cruelty and avarice of their soldiers. This was so difficult that 
it was the cause of the ruin of many, since it was difficult to 
satisfy the soldiers and the people. For the people loved 
quiet, and therefore loved modest princes, and the soldiers 
loved a prince with a military spirit who was insolent, cruel, 
and rapacious. They wanted him to practice these things 
on the people so that they could double their pay and 
give vent to their avarice and cruelty. These things always 
brought about the ruin of those emperors who by nature or 
by art did not have a great reputation such that they could 
hold both in check. And most of them, especially those who 
came to the principate as new men, once they recognized 
the difficulty of these two diverse humors, turned to sat­
isfying the soldiers, caring little about injuring the people. 
This course was necessary; for since princes cannot fail to 
be hated by someone, they are at first forced not to be hated 
by the people generally; 12 and when they cannot continue 
this, they have to contrive with all industry to avoid the 
hatred of those communities which are most powerful. 
And so those emperors who because they were new had 
need of extraordinary support stuck to the soldiers rather 
than the people, which nonetheless turned out useful for 
them or not according to whether that prince knew how to 
keep himself in repute with them. From the causes men­
tioned above, Marcus, Pertinax, and Alexander, all living a 
modest life, lovers of justice, enemies of cruelty, humane 
12. universita is singular here, according to some MSS accepted by 
Chabod; it is plural and translated as "communities" in the next clause; 
universita is derived from the medieval Latin universitas, which means 
both a legal body or corporation and (sometimes) the community on 
which such bodies depend. NM's usage lacks the legalism of medieval 
usage. 

and kind, ali, except for Marcus, came to a bad end. Only 
Marcus lived and died most honorably, because he suc­
ceeded to the empire by hereditary right and did not have to 
acknowledge it as from either the soldiers or the people; 
then, since he was attended with many virtues that made 
him venerable, while he lived he always kept the one order 
and the other within its bounds, and was never either hated 
or despised. But Pertinax was created emperor against the 
will of the soldiers, who, since they were used to living in 
license under Commodus, could not tolerate the decent life 
to which Pertinax wanted to return them; hence, having 
created hatred for himself, and to this hatred added disdain 
since he was old, he was ruined in the first beginnings of his 
administration. 
And here one should note that hatred is acquired 
through good deeds as well as bad ones; and so, as I said 
above,13 a prince who wants to maintain his state is often 
forced not to be good. For when that community 14 of which 
you judge you have need to maintain yourself is corrupt, 
whether they are the people or the soldiers or the great, you 
must follow their humor to satisfY them, and then good 
deeds are your enemy. But let us come to Alexander. He was 
of such goodness that among the other praise attributed to 
him is this: that in the fourteen years he held the em­
pire no one was ever put to death by him without a trial. 
Nonetheless, since he was held to be effeminate and a man 
who let himself be governed by his mother, and for this 
came to be despised, the army conspired against him and 
killed him. 
Reviewing15 now, by contrast, the qualities of Com­
modus, of Severus,16 Antoninus Caracalia, and Max-
13. Chapter IS. 
14. See note 12 above. 
IS. lit.: discoursing on. 
16. Septimius Severns, who in Discourses on Livy I 10 is called 
a criminal. 
77 

iminus, you 17 will find them very cruel and very rapacious. 
To satisfy the soldiers, they would not spare any kind of 
injury that could be inflicted on the people; and all except 
Severus came to a bad end. For in Severus was so much 
virtue that, by keeping the soldiers his friends, although the 
people were overburdened by him, he was always able to 
rule happily because his virtues made him so admirable in 
the sight of the soldiers and the people that the latter re­
mained somehow astonished and stupefied, while the 
former were reverent and satisfied. 
And because the actions of this man were great and 
notable in a new prince, I want to show briefly how well he 
knew how to use the persons of the fox and the lion, whose 
natures I say abovel8 are necessary for a prince to imitate. 
Since Severus knew of the indolence of Emperor Julianus, 
he persuaded his army, of which he was captain in Slavonia, 
that it would be good to go to Rome and avenge the death 
of Pertinax, who had been put to death by the praetorian 
soldiers. Under this pretext, without showing that he aspired 
to the empire, he moved his army against Rome; and he was 
in Italy before his departure was known. When he arrived at 
Rome, he was elected emperor by the Senate out of fear and 
Julianus put to death. After this beginning there remained 
two difficulties for Severus if he wanted to become lord of 
the whole state: one in Asia, where Pescennius Niger, the 
head of the Asian armies, had had himself called emperor; 
and the other in the West, where Albinus also aspired to the 
empire. And because he judged it dangerous to disclose 
himself as an enemy to both, he decided to attack Niger 
and deceive Albinus. To Albinus he wrote that since he had 
been elected emperor by the Senate he wanted to share that 
dignity with him; he sent him the title of Caesar, and by 
decision of the Senate accepted him as colleague. These 
17. The formal or plural you. 
18. Chapter 18. 

things were accepted by Albinus as true. But after Severus 
had defeated Niger, put him to death, and brought peace to 
affairs in the East, he returned to Rome and complained in 
the Senate that Albinus, hardly grateful for the benefits he 
had received from him, had perfidiously sought to kill him, 
and for this it was necessary for Severus to go punish his 
ingratitude. Then he went to meet him in France, and took 
from him his state and his life. 
Thus, whoever examines minutely the actions of this 
man will find him a very fierce lion and a very astute fox, 
will see that he was feared and revered by everyone, and not 
hated by the army, and will not marvel that he, a new 
man, could have held so much power.19 For his very great 
reputation always defended him from the hatred that the 
people could have conceived for him because of his robber­
ies. But his son Antoninus [Caracalia] was himself a man 
who had most excellent parts that made him marvelous in 
the sight of the people and pleasing to the soldiers. For he 
was a military man, very capable of enduring every trouble, 
disdainful of ali delicate food and of ali other softness, which 
made him loved by ali the armies. Nonetheless, his ferocity 
and cruelty were so great and so unheard of-for after 
infinite individual killings he had put to death a great part of 
the people of Rome and all the people of Alexandria-that 
he became most hateful to all the world. He began to be 
feared even by those whom he had around him, so that he 
was killed by a centurion in the midst of his army. Here it is 
to be noted that deaths such as these, which follow from the 
decision of an obstinate spirit, cannot be avoided by princes 
because anyone who does not care about death can hurt20 
him; but the prince may well fear them less because they are 
very rare. He should only guard against doing grave injury 
to anyone of those whom he uses and has around him in the 
19. lit.: empire. 
20. lit.: offend. 
79 

service of his principality, as Antoninus had done. He had 
put to death with disgrace a brother of that centurion, and 
threatened him every day; yet he kept him in his bodyguard, 
which was a rash policy likely to bring ruin, as happened 
to him.21 
But let us come to Commodus, who held the empire 
with great ease because he had it by hereditary right, being 
the son of Marcus. It was enough for him only to follow in 
the footsteps of his father, and he would have satisfied both 
the soldiers and the people. But since he had a cruel and 
bestial spirit, so as to practice his rapacity on the people he 
turned to indulging the armies and making them licentious. 
On the other hand, by not keeping his dignity, by descend­
ing often into theaters to fight with gladiators, and by doing 
other very base things hardly deserving of the imperial maj­
esty, he became contemptible in the sight of the soldiers. 
And since he was hated on one side and despised on the 
other, he was conspired against and put to death. 
It remains now to tell of the qualities of Maxirninus. 
He was a very warlike man; and since the armies were 
disgusted with the softness of Alexander, whom I discussed 
above, when he was put to death they elected Maximinus to 
the empire. He did not possess it for long because two things 
made him hated and contemptible: one was being of very 
base origin22 because he had formerly herded sheep in 
Thrace (which was very well known everywhere and 
brought great disdain for him in the sight of everyone); the 
other was that because at the start of his principality he had 
deferred going to Rome and taking possession of the impe­
rial throne, he had established an opinion of himself as very 
21. See also Discourses on Livy III 6, where NM says that the centu­
rion was the instrument or executive of another conspirator, Macrinus, 
who was Caracalla's prefect and is not said to have suffered "grave injury" 
from Caracalla. Macrinus proclaimed himself emperor in 217 and was 
overthrown in 2 18. 
22. lit.: being very base. 
80 

cruel, since he had committed many cruelties through his 
prefects in Rome and everywhere in the empire. So, since 
the whole world was excited by indignation at the baseness 
of his blood and by hatred arising from fear of his ferocity, 
Africa rebelled first, then the Senate with all the people of 
Rome; and all Italy conspired against him. These were 
joined by his own army, which, while besieging Aquileia 
and finding difficulty in capturing it, became disgusted with 
this cruelty, and fearing him less because it saw he had so 
many enemies, it killed him. 
I do not want to reason about either Heliogabalus or 
Macrinus or ]ulianus, who, because they were altogether 
contemptible, were immediately eliminated; but I shall 
come to the conclusion of this discourse. And I say that the 
princes of our times have less of this difficulty of satisfying 
the soldiers by extraordinary means in their governments. 
For notwithstanding that one has to show them some con­
sideration, yet this is quickly settled because none of these 
princes has armies joined together which are entrenched in 
the government and administration of provinces, as were 
the armies of the Roman Empire. And so, if at that time it 
was necessary to satisfy the soldiers rather than the people, it 
was because the soldiers could do more than the people. 
Now it is necessary for all princes except the Turk and the 
Sultan23 to satisfy the people rather than the soldiers, because 
the people can do more than the soldiers. I except the 
Turk from this, since he always keeps around him twelve 
thousand infantry and fifteen thousand horse on whom 
the security and strength of his kingdom depend; and it is 
necessary for that lord to put off every other regard and 
23. Apparently "the Turk" is Selim I, sultan of the Ottoman Turks 
from 1512 to 1520, and "the Sultan" is the last sultan of the Mamelukes in 
Egypt, Tuman Bey, who was overthrown by Selim I in 1517. Selim I is 
called "the Grand Turk" by NM in the Discourses on Livy: see I I, 19, 30; 
II 17; III 6, 35. 
81 

keep them his friends. Similarly, since the kingdom of the 
sultan is in the hands of the soldiers, he also is required to 
keep them his friends, without respect for the people. And 
you24 have to note that the sultan's state is formed unlike all 
other principalities because it is similar to the Christian 
pontificate, which cannot be called either a hereditary prin­
cipality or a new principality. For it is not the sons of the old 
prince who are the heirs and become the lords, but the one 
who is elected to that rank by those who have the authority 
for it. And this being an ancient order, one cannot call it a 
new principality, because some of the difficulties in new 
principalities are not in it; for if the prince is indeed new, the 
orders of that state are old and are ordered to receive him as 
if he were their hereditary lord. 
But let us return to our matter. I say that whoever 
considers the discourse written above will see that either 
hatred or disdain has been the cause of the ruin of the 
emperors named before, and will also know whence it arises 
that, though some of them proceeded in one mode and 
some in the contrary mode, in whichever mode, one of 
them came to a happy end and the others to unhappy ends. 
For to Pertinax and Alexander, because they were new 
princes, it was useless and harmful to wish to imitate Mar­
cus, who was in the principate by hereditary right; and 
similarly, for Caracalla, Commodus, and Maximinus it was a 
pernicious thing to imitate Severus, because they did not 
have as much virtue as would allow them to follow in his 
footsteps. Therefore, a new prince in a new principality 
cannot imitate the actions of Marcus, nor again is it neces­
sary to follow those of Severus; but he should take from 
Severus those parts which are necessary to found his state 
and from Marcus those which are fitting and glorious to 
conserve a state that is already established and firm. 
24. The formal or plural you. 
82 

xx 
Whether Fortresses and Many 
Other Things Which Are Made 
and Done by Princes Every Day 
Are Useful or Useless 
Some princes have disarmed their subjects so as to hold their 
states securely; some others have kept their subject towns 
divided; some have nourished enmities against themselves; 
some others have turned to gaining to themselves those who 
had been suspect to them at the beginning of their states; 
some have built fortresses; some have knocked them down 
and destroyed them. And although one cannot give a defi­
nite judgment on all these things unless one comes to the 
particulars of those states where any such decision has to be 
made, nonetheless I shall speak in that broad mode which 
the matter permits in itself. 
There has never been, then, a new prince who has 
disarmed his subjects; on the contrary, whenever he has 
found them unarmed, he has always armed them. For when 
they are armed, those arms become yours; those whom 
you suspected become faithful, and those who were faithful 
remain so; and from subjects they are made into your parti­
sans. And because all subjects cannot be armed, if those 
whom you arm are benefited, one can act with more se­
curity toward the others. The difference of treatment that 
they recognize regarding themselves makes them obligated 
to you; the others excuse you, judging it necessary that 
those who have more danger and more obligation deserve 
more. But, when you disarm them, you begin to offend 
them; you show that you distrust them either for cowardice 
or for lack of faith, both of which opinions generate hatred 

against you. And because you cannot remain unarmed, you 
must turn to a mercenary military, which is of the quality 
described above; I and even if it were good, it cannot be so 
good as to defend you against powerful enemies and suspect 
subjects. So, as I said, a new prince of a new principality 
always has ordered the arms there. The histories are full of 
examples of this. 
But when a prince acquires a new state that is added as 
a member to his old one, then it is necessary to disarm that 
state, except for those who were your partisans in acquiring 
it. These, too, it is necessary to render soft and effeminate, 
in time and with opportunity, and to be ordered so that the 
arms of all your state are only with your own soldiers, who 
live next to you in your old state. 
Our ancients, and those who were esteemed wise, used 
to say that it was necessary to hold Pistoia with parties and 
Pisa with fortresses; and because of this they nourished 
differences in some towns subject to them, so as to hold 
them more easily. In times when Italy was in balance in a 
certain mode, this would have been good to do, but I do not 
believe that one could give it today as a teaching. For I do 
not believe that divisions ever do any good; on the contrary, 
when the enemy approaches, of necessity divided cities are 
immediately lost, because the weaker party always joins the 
external forces and the other will not be able to rule. 
The Venetians, moved as I believe by the reasons writ­
ten above, nourished the Guelf and Ghibelline sects in the 
cities subject to them. Although the Venetians never let 
them come to blood, still they nourished these contentions 
among them, so that occupied as those citizens were with 
their differences, they did not unite against the Venetians. 
As may be seen, this did not turn out according to their plan 
later, because when they were defeated at Vaili, one party 
immediately became daring, and took all of their state from 
L See Chapter 12. 

them. Such modes, therefore, imply weakness in the prince. 
For in a vigorous principality such divisions are never per­
mitted, because they bring profit only in time of peace, 
as subjects can be managed more easily through them; 
but when war comes, such an order shows its own falla­
Ciousness. 
Without doubt princes become great when they over­
come difficulties made for them and opposition made to 
them. So fortune, especially when she wants to make a new 
prince great-since he has a greater necessity to acquire 
reputation than a hereditary prince-makes enemies arise 
for him and makes them undertake enterprises against him, 
so that he has cause to overcome them and to climb higher 
on the ladder that his enemies have brought for him. There­
fore many judge that a wise prince, when he has the op­
portunity for it, should astutely nourish some enmity so that 
when he has crushed it, his greatness emerges the more 
from it. 
Princes, and especially those that are new, have found 
more faith and more utility in those men who at the begin­
ning of their states were held to be suspect than in those 
whom they trusted at the beginning. Pandolfo Petrucci, 
prince of Siena, ruled his state more with those who had 
been suspect to him than with the others. But one cannot 
speak broadly of this thing because it varies according to the 
subject. I will only say this, that the prince will always be 
able to win over to himself with the greatest ease those men 
who in the beginning of a principality had been enemies, 
and who are of such quality that to maintain themselves they 
need somewhere to lean. They are all the more forced to 
serve him faithfully as they know it is more necessary for 
them to cancel out with deeds the sinister opinion one has 
taken of them. And so the prince always extracts more use 
from them than from those who, while serving him with 
too much security, neglect his affairs. 
And since the matter requires it, I do not want to leave 
85 

out a reminder to princes who have newly taken a state 
through internal support within it, that they consider well 
what cause moved those who supported them to support 
them. If it is not natural affection toward them but only 
because those supporters were not content with that state, 
he will be able to keep them his friends with trouble and 
great difficulty, because it is impossible for him to make 
them content. And while reviewing2 well the cause of this, 
with examples drawn from ancient and modern things, he 
will see that it is much easier to gain as friends to himself men 
who were content with the state beforehand, and therefore 
were his enemies, than those who, because they were not 
content with it, became friends and gave him support in 
seizing it. 
It has been the custom of princes, so as to be able 
to hold their states more securely, to build fortresses that 
would be a bridle and bit for those who might plan to act 
against them, and to have a secure refuge from sudden 
attack.3 I praise this mode because it has been used since 
antiquity. Nonetheless, in our times Messer Niccolo Vitelli 
was seen to destroy two fortresses in Citti di Castello in 
order to hold that state. When Guidobaldo, duke of Ur­
bino, returned to his dominion from which Cesare Borgia 
had expelled him, he razed all the fortresses in that province 
to their foundations; and he judged that without them he 
would with greater difficulty lose his state again. When 
the Bentivogli returned to Bologna, they adopted similar 
measures. Fortresses are thus useful or not according to the 
times, and if they do well for you in one regard, they hurt4 
you in another. And one may discuss this issue thus. The 
prince who has more fear of the people than of foreigners 
ought to make fortresses, but the one who has more fear of 
2. lit.: discoursing on. 
3. On fortresses, see Discourses on Livy II 21, 24, 25; III 27, 37. 
4. lit.: offend. 
86 

foreigners than of the people, ought to omit them. The 
castle in Milan built by Francesco Sforza has brought and 
will bring more war to the Sforza house than any other 
disorder of that state. Therefore the best fortress there is, is 
not to be hated by the people, because although you may 
have fortresses, if the people hold you in hatred fortresses do 
not save you; for to peoples who have taken up arms for­
eigners will never be lacking to come to their aid. In our 
times fortresses have not been seen to bring profit to any 
prince, unless to the Countess of Forli, when Count Giro­
lamo, her consort, died; for by means of a fortress she was 
able to escape a popular uprising,5 to await help from Milan, 
and to recover her state.6 And the times then were such that 
a foreigner could not help the people. But later, fortresses 
were worth little to her when Cesare Borgia attacked her, 
and her hostile people joined with the foreigner. Therefore, 
then and before it would have been more secure for her not 
to be hated by the people than to have had fortresses. So, 
having considered all these things, I shall praise whoever 
makes fortresses and whoever does not, and I shall blame 
anyone who, trusting in fortresses, thinks little of being 
hated by the people. 
5. lit.: impetus. 
6. This story is told in vivid detail in Discourses on Livy III 6 and 
Florentine Histories VIII 34. 
XXI 
What a Prince Should Do to Be 
Held in Esteem 
Nothing makes a prince so much esteemed as to carry on 
great enterprises and to give rare examples of himself In 

our times we have Ferdinand of Aragon, the present king of 
Spain. This man can be called an almost new prince because 
from being a weak king he has become by fame and by glory 
the first king among the Christians; and, if you consider his 
actions, youl will find them all very great and some of them 
extraordinary. In the beginning of his reign he attacked 
Granada, and that enterprise was the foundation of his state. 
First, he made it at leisure and without fear of being inter­
fered with; he kept the minds of the barons of Castile 
preoccupied; while thinking of that war, they did not think 
of innovating. And in the meantime he acquired reputation 
and power2 over them which they did not perceive. He was 
able to sustain armies with money from the Church and the 
people, and with that long war to lay a foundation for his 
own military, which later brought him honor. Besides this, 
in order to undertake greater enterprises, always making use 
of religion, he turned to an act of pious cruelty, expelling the 
Marranos from his kingdom and despoiling it of them;3 nor 
could there be an example more wretched and rarer than 
this. He attacked Africa under this same cloak, made his 
campaign in Italy, and has lately attacked France;4 and so he 
has always done and ordered great things, which have always 
kept the minds of his subjects in suspense and admiration, 
and occupied with their outcome. And his actions have 
followed upon one another in such a mode that he has never 
allowed an interval between them for men to be able to 
work quietly against him. 
It also helps very much for a prince to give rare exam­
ples of himself in governing internally, similar to those that 
I. Both you's in this sentence are the formal or plural you. 
2. lit.: empire. 
3. The Marranos, who were expelled from Spain in 1501-2 by 
Ferdinand, were Jews and Moslems who had been forcibly converted 
to Christianity. 
4. In 1512, when Ferdinand joined the Holy League. 
88 

are told of Messer Bernabo da Milano,s when the oppor­
tunity arises of someone who works for something extraor­
dinary in civil life, either for good or for ill, and of picking a 
mode of rewarding or punishing him of which much will be 
said. And above all a prince should contrive to give himself 
the fame of a great man and of an excellent talent6 in every 
action of his. 
A prince is also esteemed when he is a true friend and a 
true enemy, that is, when without any hesitation he dis­
closes himself in support of someone against another. This 
course is always more useful than to remain neutral, because 
if two powers close to you come to grips, either they are of 
such quality that if one wins, you have to fear the winner, or 
not. In either of these two cases, it will always be more 
useful to you to disclose yourself and to wage open7 war; for 
in the first case if you do not disclose yourself, you will 
always be the prey of whoever wins, to the pleasure and 
satisfaction of the one who was defeated, and you have no 
reason, nor anything, to defend you or give you refuge. For 
whoever wins does not want suspect friends who may not 
help him in adversity; whoever loses does not give you 
refuge, since you did not want to share his fortune with arms 
in hand. 
Antiochus came into Greece, summoned there by the 
Aetolians to expel the Romans from it. Antiochus sent 
spokesmen to the Achaeans, who were friends of the Ro­
mans, to urge them to remain in the middle; and on the 
other side, the Romans sought to persuade them to take up 
arms for them. This matter came up for decision in the 
council of the Achaeans, where the legate from Antiochus 
was persuading them to remain neutral, to which the Ro­
man legate responded: "As to what they say, moreover, 
5· Bernabo Visconti, duke of Milan from 1354 to 1385. 
6. Or man, in some MSS. 
7. lit.: good. 

that you should not intervene in the war, nothing is more 
alien to your interests; without thanks, without dignity you 
will be the prize of the victor." 8 
And it will always happen that the one who is not 
friendly will seek your neutrality, and he who is friendly 
to you will ask that you declare yourself with arms. And 
irresolute princes, in order to escape present dangers, follow 
that neutral way most times, and most times come to ruin. 
But, when the prince discloses himself boldly in support of 
one side, if the one to whom you adhere wins, although he 
is powerful and you remain at his discretion, he has an 
obligation to you and has a contract of love for you; and men 
are never so indecent as to crush you with so great an ex­
ample of ingratitude. Then, too, victories are never so clear 
that the winner does not have to have some respect, espe­
cially for justice. But if the one to whom you adhere loses, 
you are given refuge by him; and he helps you while he can, 
and you become the companion of a fortune that can revive. 
In the second case, when those who fight together are of 
such quality that you do not have to fear the one who wins, 
so much the greater is the prudence of joining sides; for you 
assist in the ruin of one with the aid of the other who ought 
to save him, if he were wise; and when he has won, he 
remains at your discretion; and with your aid it is impossible 
that he not win. 
And here it is to be noted that a prince must beware 
never to associate with someone more powerful than him­
self so as to attack9 others, except when necessity presses, as 
was said above. For when you win, you are left his prisoner, 
and princes should avoid as much as they can being at the 
discretion of others. The Venetians accompanied France 
against the duke of Milan, and they could have avoided 
being in that company-from which their ruin resulted. 
8. Quoted in Latin from Livy, Histories, XXXv. 49. 
9. lit.: offend. 
90 

But when one cannot avoid it (as happened to the Floren­
tines when the pope and Spain went with their armies to 
attack Lombardy), then the prince should join for the rea­
sons given above. Nor should any state ever believe that it 
can always adopt safe courses; on the contrary, it should 
think it has to take them all as doubtful. For in the order 
of things it is found that one never seeks to avoid one 
inconvenience without running into another; but prudence 
consists in knowing how to recognize the qualities of inc on­
veniences, and in picking the less bad as good. 
A prince should also show himself a lover of the virtues, 
giving recognition to virtuous men, and he should honor 
those who are excellent in an art. Next, he should inspire 
his citizens to follow their pursuits quietly, in trade and in 
agriculture and in every other pursuit of men, so that one 
person does not fear to adorn his possessions for fear that 
they be taken away from him, and another to open up a 
trade for fear of taxes. But he should prepare rewards for 
whoever wants to do these things, and for anyone who 
thinks up any way of expanding his city or his state. Besides 
this, he should at suitable times of the year keep the people 
occupied with festivals and spectacles. And because every 
city is divided into guilds or into clans, he should take 
account of those communities,IO meet with them some­
times, and make himself an example of humanity and 
munificence, always holding firm the majesty of his dignity 
nonetheless, because he can never want this to be lacking 
in anything. 
ro. See Chapter 19, note 12. 
91 

5XXII6 
Of Those Whom Princes Have as 
Secretaries 
The choice of ministers is of no small importance to a 
prince; they are good or not according to the prudence 
of the prince. And the first conjecture that is to be made of 
the brain of a lord is to see the men he has around him; 
and when they are capable and faithful, he can always be re­
puted wise because he has known how to recognize them as 
capable and to maintain them as faithful. But if they are 
otherwise, one can always pass unfavorable judgment on 
him, because the first error he makes, he makes in this 
choice. 
There was no one who knew Messer Antonio da Ve­
nafro1 as minister of Pandolfo Petrucci, prince of Siena,2 
who did not judge Pandolfo to be a most worthy man, since 
he had Antonio as his minister. And since there are three 
kinds of brains: one that understands by itself, another that 
discerns what others understand, the third that understands 
neither by itself nor through others; the first is most excel­
lent, the second excellent, and the third useless-it follows, 
therefore, of necessity that, if Pandolfo was not in the first 
rank, he was in the second. For every time that one has the 
judgment to recognize the good or evil that someone does 
or says, although he does not have the inventiveness by 
himself, he knows the bad deeds and the good of his minister 
and extols3 the one and corrects the other; and the minister 
cannot hope to deceive him and remains good himself. 
I. Antonio Giordani da Venafro (I459-1530), professor of law at 
the Studio of Siena. 
2. This is the second time Petrucci has been called "prince of 
Siena" (cf. Chapter 20); in Discourses on Livy III 6 he is called "tyrant 
of Siena." 
3. lit.: exalts. 
92 

But as to how a prince can know his minister, here is a 
mode that never fails. When you see a minister thinking 
more of himself than of you, and in all actions looking for 
something useful to himself, one so made will never be a 
good minister; never will you be able to trust him, because 
he who has someone's state in his hands should never think 
of himself but always of the prince, and he should never 
remember anything that does not pertain to the prince. And 
on the other side, the prince should think of the minister so 
as to keep him good-honoring him, making him rich, 
obligating him to himself, sharing honors and burdens with 
him so that he sees he cannot stand without the prince and 
so that many honors do not make him desire more honors, 
much wealth does not make him desire more wealth, and 
many burdens make him fear changes. When, therefore, 
ministers and princes in relation to ministers are so consti­
tuted, they can trust one another; when it is otherwise, the 
end is always damaging either for one or the other. 
5XXIII6 
In What Mode Flatterers Are to Be 
Avoided 
I do not want to leave out an important point and an error 
from which princes defend themselves with difficulty, un­
less they are very prudent or make good choices. And these 
are the flatterers of whom courts are full; for men take such 
pleasure in their own affairs and so deceive themselves there 
that they defend themselves with difficulty from this 
plague, and in trying to defend oneself from it one risks the 
danger of becoming contemptible. For there is no other 
way to guard oneself from flattery unless men understand 
93 

that they do not offend you in telling you the truth; but 
when everyone can tell you the truth, they lack reverence 
for you. Therefore, a prudent prince must hold to a third 
mode, choosing wise men in his state; and only to these 
should he give freedom 1 to speak the truth to him, and of 
those things only that he asks about and nothing else. But 
he should ask them about everything and listen to their 
opinions; then he should decide by himself, in his own 
mode; and with these councils and with each member of 
them he should behave in such a mode that everyone knows 
that the more freely he speaks, the more he will be accepted. 
Aside from these, he should not want to hear anyone; he 
should move directly to the thing that was decided and be 
obstinate in his decisions. Whoever does otherwise either 
falls headlong because of flatterers or changes often because 
of the variability of views, from which a low estimation of 
him arises. 
I want to bring up a modern example in this regard. 
Father Luca, a man of the present emperor Maximilian,2 
speaking of his majesty, told how he did not take counsel 
from anyone and never did anything in his own mode; this 
arose from holding to a policy contrary to that given above. 
For the emperor is a secretive man who does not communi­
cate his plans to anyone, nor seek their views; but as in 
putting them into effect they begin to be known and dis­
closed, they begin to be contradicted by those whom he has 
around him, and he, an agreeable3 person, is dissuaded from 
them.4 From this it arises that the things he does on one day 
he destroys on another, that no one ever understands what 
I. lit.: free will. 
2. Luca Rinaldi, a bishop and ambassador of Emperor Maximilian 
1 (1459-1519), with whom NM became acquainted during his embassy to 
the emperor in 1508. 
3. lit.: easy; see Chapter 15· 
4. See NM's similar description of Maximilian, in his Rapporto delle 
cose della Magna (1508). 
94 

he wants or plans to do, and that one cannot found oneself 
on his decisions. 
A prince, therefore, should always take counsel, but 
when he wants, and not when others want it; on the con­
trary, he should discourage everyone from counseling him 
about anything unless he asks it of them. But he should be a 
very broad questioner, and then, in regard to the things he 
asked about, a patient listener to the truth; indeed, he should 
become upset when he learns that anyone has any hesitation 
to speak it to him. And since many esteem that any prince 
who establishes an opinion of himself as prudent is so con­
sidered not because of his nature but because of the good 
counsel he has around him, without doubt they are de­
ceived. For this is a general rule that never fails: that a prince 
who is not wise by himself cannot be counseled well, unless 
indeed by chance he should submit himself to one alone to 
govern him in everything, who is a very prudent man. In 
this case he could well be, but it would not last long because 
that governor would in a short time take away his state. But 
by taking counsel from more than one, a prince who is not 
wise will never have united counsel, nor know by himself 
how to unite them. Each one of his counselors will think of 
his own interest; he will not know how to correct them or 
understand them. And they cannot be found otherwise, 
because men will always turn out bad for you unless they 
have been made good by a necessity. So one concludes that 
good counsel, from wherever it comes, must arise from the 
prudence of the prince, and not the prudence of the prince 
from good counsel. 
95 

5XXIV6 
Why the Princes of Italy Have Lost 
Their States 
When the things written above have been observed pru­
dendy, they make a new prince appear ancient and im­
mediately render him more secure and steady in his state 
than if he had grown old in it. For a new prince is observed 
much more in his actions than a hereditary one; and when 
they are recognized as virtuous, they take hold of men much 
more and obligate them much more than ancient blood. 
For men are much more taken by present things than by past 
ones, and when they find good in the present, they enjoy it 
and do not seek elsewhere; indeed they will take up every 
defense on behalf of a new prince if he is not lacking in other 
things as regards himself And so he will have the double 
glory of having made the beginning of a new principality, of 
having adorned it and consolidated it with good laws, good 
arms, good friends, 1 and good examples, just as he has a 
double shame who, having been born prince, has lost it 
through his lack of prudence. 
And if one considers those lords in Italy who have lost 
their states in our times, like the king of Naples,2 the duke of 
Milan,3 and others, one will find in them, first, a common 
defect as to arms, the causes of which have been discussed at 
length above; then, one will see that some of them either 
had a hostile people or if they had friendly peoples, did not 
know how to secure themselves against the great. For with­
out these defects, states that have enough nerve to put an 
1. Most MSS omit "good friends." 
2. Frederick of Aragon, expelled from Naples in 150 I by Ferdinand 
the Catholic and Louis XII, and dethroned. 
3. Ludovico Sforza; see Chapter 3· 

army into the field are not lost. Philip of Macedon, not the 
father of Alexander but the one who was defeated by Titus 
Quintius,4 did not have much of a state with respect to the 
greatness of the Romans and of Greece, who attacked him; 
nonetheless, because he was a military man and knew how 
to deal with the people and secure himself against the great, 
he kept up a war against them for many years; and if at 
the end he lost dominion over several cities, his kingdom 
remained to him nonetheless. 
Therefore, these princes of ours who have been in 
their principalities for many years may not accuse fortune 
when they have lost them afterwards, but their own indo­
lence; for, never having thought that quiet times could 
change (which is a common defect of men, not to take 
account of the storm during the calm), when later the times 
became adverse, they thought of fleeing and not of de­
fending themselves. And they hoped that their peoples, 
disgusted with the insolence of the victors, would call them 
back. This course is good when others are lacking; but it is 
indeed bad to have put aside other remedies for this one. For 
one should never fall in the belief you can find someone to 
pick you up. Whether it does not happen or happens, it is 
not security for you, because that defense was base and did 
not depend on you. And those defenses alone are good, are 
certain, and are lasting, that depend on you yourself and on 
your virtue. 
4. On Philip V of Macedonia (237-179 B.C.), see Discourses on Livy 
II 4,10; III 10, 37. 
97 

xxv 
How Much Fortune Can Do In 
Human Affairs, and in What Mode 
It May Be Opposed 
It is not unknown to me that many have held and hold the 
opinion that worldly things are so governed by fortune and 
by God, that men cannot correct them with their prudence, 
indeed that they have no remedy at all; and on account of 
this they might judge that one need not sweat much over 
things but let oneself be governed by chance. This opinion 
has been believed more in our times because of the great 
variability of things which have been seen and are seen 
every day, beyond every human conjecture. When I have 
thought about this sometimes, I have been in some part 
inclined to their opinion. Nonetheless, so that our free will 
not be eliminated, I judge that it might be true that fortune 
is arbiter of half of our actions, but also that she leaves the 
other half, or close to it, for us to govern. And I liken her 
to one of these violent rivers which, when they become 
enraged, flood the plains, ruin the trees and the buildings, lift 
earth from this part, drop in another; each person flees before 
them, everyone yields to their impetus without being able 
to hinder them in any regard. And although they are like 
this, it is not as if men, when times are quiet, could not 
provide for them with dikes and dams so that when they rise 
later, either they go by a canal or their impetus is neither 
so wanton nor so damaging. It happens similarly with 
fortune, which demonstrates her power where virtue 
has not been put in orderl to resist her and therefore 
turns her impetus where she knows that dams and dikes 
1. lit.: ordered. 

have not been made to contain her. And if you consider 
Italy, which is the seat of these variations and that which has 
given them motion, you will see2 a country without dams 
and without any dike. If it had been diked by suitable virtue, 
like Germany, Spain, and France, either this flood would 
not have brought the great variations that it has, or it would 
not have come here. 
And I wish that this may be enough to have said about 
opposing fortune in general. 3 But restricting myself more to 
particulars, I say that one sees a given prince be happy 
today and come to ruin tomorrow without having seen him 
change his nature or any quality. This I believe arises, first, 
from the causes that have been discussed at length in the 
preceding, that is, that the prince who leans entirely on his 
fortune comes to ruin as it varies. I believe, further, that he is 
happy who adapts his mode of proceeding to the qualities of 
the times; and similarly, he is unhappy whose procedure is in 
disaccord with the times. For one sees that in the things that 
lead men to the end that each has before him, that is, glories 
and riches, they proceed variously: one with caution,4 the 
other with impetuosity; one by violence, the other with 
art; one with patience, the other with its contrary-and 
with these different modes each can attain it. One also sees 
two cautious persons, one attaining his plan, the other 
not; and similarly two persons are equally happy with two 
different methods, one being cautious, the other impetu­
ous. This arises from nothing other than from the quality of 
the times that they conform to or not in their procedure. 
From this follows what I said, that two persons working 
differently come out with the same effect; and of two 
persons working identically, one is led to his end, the 
2. Both you 's in this sentence are the fonnal or plural you. 
3. lit.: universal. 
4. lit.: respect; respetto is translated usually as "caution" and "hesita­
tion," occasionally as "regard." 
99 

other not. On this also depends the variability of the good: 
for if one governs himself with caution and patience, and the 
times and affairs turn in such a way that his government 
is good, he comes out happy; but if the times and affairs 
change, he is ruined because he does not change his mode of 
proceeding. Nor may a man be found so prudent as to know 
how to accommodate himself to this, whether because he 
cannot deviate from what nature inclines him to or also 
because, when one has always flourished by walking on one 
path, he cannot be persuaded to depart from it. And so the 
cautious man, when it is time to come to impetuosity, does 
not know how to do it, hence comes to ruin: for if he would 
change his nature with the times and with affairs, his fortune 
would not change. 
Pope Julius II proceeded impetuously in all his affairs, 
and he found the times and affairs so much in conformity 
with his mode of proceeding that he always achieved a 
happy end. Considers the first enterprise that he undertook 
in Bologna, while Messer Giovanni Bentivoglio was still 
living. The Venetians were not content with it; nor was the 
king of Spain; with France he was holding discussions6 on 
that enterprise; and nonetheless, with his ferocity and im­
petuosity, he personally put that expedition into motion. 
This move made Spain and the Venetians stand still in sus­
pense, the latter out of fear and the other because of the 
desire he had to recover the whole kingdom of Naples. 
From the other side he pulled the king of France after him; 
because when that king saw him move, and since he desired 
to make Julius his friend in order to bring down the Vene­
tians, he judged he could not deny him his troops without 
injuring him openly. Julius thus accomplished with his im­
petuous move what no other pontiff, with all human pru­
dence, would ever have accomplished, because if he had 
5. The formal or plural you should be understood here. 
6. lit.: reasonings. 
100 

waited to depart from Rome with firm conclusions and 
everything in order, as any other pontiff would have done, 
he would never have succeeded. For the king of France 
would have had a thousand excuses and the others would 
have raised in him a thousand fears. I wish to omit all his 
other actions, since all have been alike and all succeeded 
well. And the brevity of his life did not allow him to feel the 
contrary, because if times had come when he had needed to 
proceed with caution, his ruin would have followed: he 
would never have deviated from those modes to which 
nature inclined him.7 
I conclude, thus, that when fortune varies and men 
remain obstinate in their modes, men are happy while they 
are in accord, and as they come into discord, unhappy. I 
judge this indeed, that it is better to be impetuous than 
cautious, because fortune is a woman; and it is necessary, if 
one wants to hold her down, to beat her and strike her 
down. And one sees that she lets herself be won more by the 
impetuous than by those who proceed coldly. And so al­
ways, like a woman, she is the friend of the young, because 
they are less cautious, more ferocious, and command her 
with more audacity. 
7. See Discourses on Livy III 9. 
5XXVIea.' 
Exhortation to Seize Italy and to 
Free Her from the Barbarians 
Thus, having considered everything discussed above, and 
thinking to myself whether in Italy at present the times have 
been tending to the honor of a new prince, and whether 
10 1 

there is matter to give opportunity to someone prudent and 
virtuous to introduce a form that would bring honor to him 
and good to the community of men there, it appears to me 
that so many things are tending to the benefit of a new 
prince that I do not know what time has ever been more apt 
for it. And if, as I said,l it was necessary for anyone wanting 
to see the virtue of Moses that the people of Israel be en­
slaved in Egypt, and to learn the greatness of spirit of Cy­
rus, that the Persians be oppressed by the Medes, and to 
learn the excellence of Theseus, that the Athenians be dis­
persed, so at present to know the virtue of an Italian spirit2 it 
was necessary that Italy be reduced to the condition in 
which she is at present, which is more enslaved than the 
Hebrews, more servile than the Persians, more dispersed 
than the Athenians, without a head, without order, beaten, 
despoiled, torn, pillaged, and having endured ruin of every 
sort. 
And although up to now a glimmer has shone in some­
one who could judge that he had been ordered by God for 
her redemption, yet later it was seen that in the highest 
course of his actions, he was repulsed by fortune. So, left as 
if lifeless, she awaits whoever it can be that will heal her 
wounds, and put an end to the sacking of Lombardy, to the 
taxes on the kingdom and on Tuscany, and cure her of her 
sores that have festered now for a long time. One may see 
how she prays God to send her someone to redeem her from 
these barbarous cruelties and insults. One may also see her 
ready and disposed to follow a flag, provided that there be 
someone to pick it up. Nor may one see at present anyone in 
whom she can hope more than in your illustrious house, 
which with its fortune and virtue, supported by God and by 
the Church of which it is now prince,3 can put itself at the 
I. See Chapter 6. 
2. spirito, not animo. 
3. Cardinal Giovanni de' Medici, Lorenzo's uncle, became Pope 
Leo X in 1513. 
102 

head of this redemption. This is not very difficult if you4 
summon up the actions and lives of those named above. And 
although these men are rare and marvelous, nonetheless 
they were men, and each of them had less opportunity than 
the present; for their undertaking was not more just than 
this one, nor easier, nor was God more friendly to them 
than to you. Here there is great justice: "for war is just to 
whom it is necessary, and arms are pious when there is no 
hope but in arms." 5 Here there is very great readiness, and 
where there is great readiness, there cannot be great diffi­
culty, provided that your house keeps its aim on the orders 
of those whom I have put forth. Besides this, here may be 
seen extraordinary things without example, brought about6 
by God: the sea has opened; a cloud has escorted you along 
the way; the stone has poured forth water; here manna has 
rained;7 everything has concurred in your greatness. The 
remainder you must do yourself God does not want to do 
every thing, so as not to take free will from us and that part of 
the glory that falls to us. 
And it is not a marvel if none of the Italians named 
before has been able to do what it is hoped will be done by 
your illustrious house, and if in so many revolutions in Italy 
and in so many maneuvers of war, it always appears that 
military virtue has died out in her. This arises from the fact 
that er ancient orders were not 00 
and that there has not 
been anxs.>ne w 0 
as Bn 
ow to find new ones; and 
0: mg 
.,.... 
<r muctI 
nb 
0: a 
g-newly-as th 
4. The formal or plural you. 
s. Quoted in Latin from Livy IX. 1; see also Discourses on Livy III 
12, and Florentine Histories V 8, where the same quotation is used to 
emphasize necessity rather than justice. 
6. lit.: conducted. 
7. These are references to miracles that occurred as Moses led the 
Israelites to the promised land, just before the revelation at Mount Sinai. 
They are not given in the same order as in the Bible, Exodus 14:21, 13:21, 
17:6,16:4· 
r03 

t ··n 
reatnes . n the 
, 
they make him revered and admirable. And in Italy matter is 
not lacking for introducing every form; here there is great 
virtue in the limbs, if it were not lacking in the heads. Look 
how in duels and in encounters with few the Italians are 
superior in force, dexterity, and ingenuity. But when it 
comes to armies, they do not compare. And everything 
follows from the weakness at the head, because those who 
know are not obeyed, and each thinks he knows, since up to 
now no one has been able to raise himself, both by virtue 
and by fortune, to a point where the others will yield to him. 
From this it follows that in so much time, in so many wars 
made in the last twenty years, when there has been an army 
entirely Italian it has always proven to be bad. The first 
testimony to this is Taro, then Alessandria, Capua, Genoa, 
Vaili, Bologna, Mestre.8 
Thus, if your illustrious house wants to follow those 
excellent men who redeemed their countries,9 . t 
. 
e..cessa 
before all other things, as the true oundation 0 eve,(Y. 
etta ·ng. 0 I2ro\titL ·tse 
Wit 
ts 0 
n a)JJls' or one can­
not 
ave more alt 
u ,  nor truer, nor 
etter soldiers. And 
although each of them may be good, all together become 
better when they see themselves commanded by their 
prince, and honored and indulged by him. It is necessary, 
therefore, to prepare such arms for oneself so as to be able 
with Italian virtue to defend oneself from foreigners. And 
although Swiss and Spanish infantry are esteemed to be 
terrifying, nonetheless there is a defect in both, by means of 
which a third order might not only oppose them but also be 
confident of overcoming them. For the Spanish cannot 
withstand horse, and the Swiss have to be afraid of infantry 
if they meet in combat any that are obstinate like them­
selves. Hence it has been seen, and will be seen by experi-
8. Seven battles that were Italian defeats, from 1495 to 1513. 
9. lit.: provinces. 
104 

ence, that the Spanish cannot withstand French cavalry, and 
the Swiss are ruined by Spanish infantry. And although a 
complete experiment of this last has not been seen, yet an 
indication of it was seen in the battle of Ravenna, 10 when 
the Spanish infantry confronted the German battalions, 
who use the same order as the Swiss. There the Spanish, 
with their agile bodies and aided by their bucklers, came 
between and under the Germans' pikes and attacked them 
safely without their having any remedy for it; and if it had 
not been for the cavalry that charged them, they would have 
worn out all the Germans. Having thus learned the defects 
of both of these infantry, one can order a new one that 
would resist horse and not be afraid of infantry; this will be 
done by a regeneration of arms and a change in orders. And 
these are among those things which, when newly ordered, 
give reputation and greatness to a new prince. 
Thus, one should not let this opportunity pass, for Italy, 
after so much time, to see her redeemer. I cannot express 
with what love he would be received in all those provinces 
that have suffered from these floods from outside; with what 
thirst for revenge, with what obstinate faith, with what pi­
ety, with what tears. What doors would be closed to him? 
What peoples would deny him obedience? What envy 
would oppose him? What Italian would deny him homage? 
This barbarian domination stinks to everyone. Then may 
your illustrious house take up this task with the spirit and 
hope in which just enterprises are taken up, so that under 
its emblem this fatherland may be ennobled and under its 
auspices the saying of Petrarch's may come true: 
V irtue will take up arms against fury, 
and make the battle short, 
because the ancient valor in Italian hearts 
is not yet dead. 11 
10. April I I, IS 12; see Chapter 3. 
I I. Petrarch, Italia mia, 93-96. 
lOS 

Appendix 
In the following letter, which has been called the most celebrated 
in all of Italian literature, Machiavelli describes one day in his life 
and remarks casually that he has just completed The Prince. The let­
ter was written in response to his friend Francesco Vettori, Flor­
entine ambassador in Rome, who had previously sent a letter describ­
ing a day in his life. Machiavelli's reply is partly a parody of Vettori's 
somewhat self-important recounting, but it also gives us a glimpse, 
from the outside, of the political philosopher at work. We learn, 
among other things, that The Prince arose from conversations with the 
ancients, and that, in it, Machiavelli delved as deeply as he could into 
his subject. 
NICCOLO MACHIAVELLI TO FRANCESCO VETTORI, 
FLORENCE, DECEMBER la, 1513. 
Magnificent ambassador: 
" Never were divine favors late." 1 I say this because I appear 
to have lost, no, mislaid your favor, since you have gone a 
long time without writing me, and I was doubtful whence 
the cause could arise. And of all those that came to my mind 
I took little account except for one, when I feared you had 
stopped writing to me because someone had written to you 
that I was not a good warden of your letters; and I knew 
that, apart from Filippo and Pagolo, no one else had seen 
them on account of me. I regained your favor by your last 
letter of the 23rd of last month, where I was very pleased to 
see how orderedly and quietly you exercise this public of­
fice; and I urge you to continue so, for whoever lets go of his 
own convenience for the convenience of others, only loses 
his own and gets no thanks from them. And because For­
tune wants to do everything, she wants us to allow her to do 
it, to remain quiet and not give trouble, and to await the 
I. Petrarch, Triul11ph ojDivillily, 13. 
r07 

time at which she allows men something to do; and then it 
will be right for you to give more effort, to watch things 
more, and for me to leave my villa and say: " Here I am." 
Therefore, wishing to return equal favors, I cannot tell you 
in this letter of mine anything other than what my life is like, 
and if you judge that it should be bartered for yours, I will be 
content to exchange it. 
I stay in my villa, and since these last chance events 
occurred,2 I have not spent, to add them all up, twenty days 
in Florence. Until now I have been catching thrushes with 
my own hands. I would get up before day, prepare traps, 
and go out with a bundle of cages on my back, so that I 
looked like Geta when he returned from the harbor with 
Arnphitryon's books; I caught at least two, at most six 
thrushes. And so passed all September; then this pastime, 
though annoying and strange, gave out, to my displeasure. 
And what my life is like, I will tell you. I get up in the 
morning with the sun and go to a wood of mine that I am 
having cut down, where I stay for two hours to look over 
the work of the past day, and to pass time with the wood­
cutters, who always have some disaster on their hands 
either among themselves or with their neighbors. And 
regarding this wood I would have a thousand beautiful 
things to tell you of what happened to me with Frosino da 
Panzano and others who want wood from it. And Frosino 
in particular sent for a number of loads without telling me 
anything, and on payment wanted to hold back ten lire 
from me, which he said he should have had from me four 
years ago when he beat me at cricca at Antonio Guicciar­
dini's. I began to raise the devil and was on the point of ac­
cusing the driver who had gone for it of theft; but Giovanni 
Machiavelli came between us and brought us to agree. 
Batista Guicciardini, Filippo Ginori, Tornmaso del Bene, 
2. Perhaps a reference to NM's imprisonment and torture in Febru­
ary and March Of1513. 
ro8 

and some other citizens, when that north wind was blowing, 
ordered a load each from me. I promised to all, and sent one 
to Tommaso which in Florence turned into a half-load, 
because to stack it up there were himself, his wife, his 
servant, and his children, so that they looked like Gabbura 
with his boys when he bludgeons an ox on Thursday. So, 
when I saw whose profit it was, I told the others I had no 
more wood; and all have made a big point of it, especially 
Batista, who counts this among the other disasters of Prato. 
When I leave the wood, I go to a spring, and from 
there to an aviary of mine. I have a book under my arm, 
Dante or Petrarch, or one of the minor poets like Tibullus, 
Ovid, and such. I read of their amorous passions and their 
loves; I remember my own and enjoy myself for a while in 
this thinking. Then I move on along the road to the inn; I 
speak with those passing by; I ask them news of their places; 
I learn various things; and I note the various tastes and 
different fancies of men. In the meantime comes the hour to 
dine, when I eat with my company what food this poor villa 
and tiny patrimony allow. Having eaten, I return to the inn; 
there is the host, ordinarily a butcher, a miller, two bakers. 
With them I become a rascal for the whole day, playing at 
cricca and tric-trac, from which arise a thousand quarrels and 
coundess abuses with insulting words, and most times we 
are fighting over a penny and yet we can be heard shouting 
from San Casciano. Thus involved with these vermin I 
scrape the mold off my brain and I satisfy the malignity of 
this fate of mine, as I am content to be trampled on this path 
so as to see if she will be ashamed of it. 
When evening has come, I return to my house and go 
into my study. At the door I take off my clothes of the day, 
covered with mud and mire, and I put on my regal and 
courtly garments; and decendy reclothed, I enter the an­
cient courts of ancient men, where, received by them 
lovingly, I feed on the food that alone is mine and that I was 
born for. There I am not ashamed to speak with them and to 
109 

ask them the reason for their actions; and they in their 
humanity reply to me. And for the space of four hours I feel 
no boredom, I forget every pain, I do not fear poverty, death 
does not frighten me. I deliver myself entirely to them. 
And because Dante says that to have understood with­
out retaining does not make knowledge,3 I have noted 
what capital I have made from their conversation and have 
composed a little work De Principatibus [On Principalities], 
where I delve as deeply as I can into reflections on this 
subject, debating what a principality is, of what kinds they 
are, how they are acquired, how they are maintained, why 
they are lost. And if you have ever been pleased by :my of my 
whimsies, this one should not displease you; and to a prince, 
and especially to a new prince, it should be welcome. So I 
am addressing it to his Magnificence, Giuliano.4 Filippo 
Casavecchia has seen it; he can give you an account in part 
both of the thing in itself and of the discussions I had with 
him, although I am all the time fattening and polishing it. 
You wish, magnificent ambassador, that I leave this 
life and come to enjoy your life with you. I will do it in any 
case, but what tempts me now is certain dealings of mine 
which I will have done in six weeks. What makes me be 
doubtful is that the Soderini are there, whom I would be 
forced, if I came, to visit and speak with. I should fear that at 
my return I would not expect to get off at my house, but I 
would get off at the Bargello,5 for although this state has 
very great foundations and great security, yet it is new, and 
because of this suspicious; nor does it lack wiseacres who, to 
3. Paradiso, V, 41-42. 
4. Giuliano de' Medici, the duke of Nemours, son of Lorenzo the 
Magnificent. He left Florence in September of) 5 I 3 and was in Rome at 
the time ofNM's letter. He died in 1516, and NM decided to dedicate The 
Prince to Lorenzo de' Medici, grandson of Lorenzo the Magnificent, who 
became duke ofUrbino in 1516. 
5. The prison, because NM would be suspected of plotting with 
the Soderini for the return of the previous regime. 
110 

appear like Pagolo Bertini, would let others run up a bill and 
leave me to think of paying. I beg you to relieve me of 
this fear, and then I will come in the time stated to meet 
you anyway. 
I have discussed with Filippo this little work of mine, 
whether to give it to him6 or not; and if it is good to give it, 
whether it would be good for me to take it or send it to you. 
Not giving it would make me fear that at the least it would 
not be read by Giuliano and that this Ardinghelli would take 
for himself the honor of this latest effort of mine. The ne­
cessity that chases me makes me give it, because I am be­
coming worn out, and I cannot remain as I am for a long 
time without becoming despised because of poverty, besides 
the desire I have that these Medici lords begin to make use 
of me even if they should begin by making me roll a stone. 
For if I should not then win them over to me, I should 
complain of myself; and through this thing, if it were read, 
one would see that I have neither slept through nor played 
away the fifteen years I have been at the study of the art of 
the state. And anyone should be glad to have the service of 
one who is full of experience at the expense of another. 
And one should not doubt my faith, because having always 
observed faith, I ought not now be learning to break it. 
Whoever has been faithful and good for forty-three years, as 
r have, ought not to be able to change his nature, and of my 
faith and goodness my poverty is witness. 
I should like, then, for you to write me again on how 
this matter appears to you, and I commend myself to you. 
Be prosperous. 
IO December 15 I 3 
Niccolo Machiavelli, in Florence. 
6. Giuliano. 
III 

