LEO STRAUSS

PLATO’s LAWS

A course offered in the winter quarter, 1959

The Department of Political Science, The University of Chicago

Edited and with an introduction by Lorraine Pangle
Lorraine Pangle is Professor of Government and Co-Director of the Thomas Jefferson Center for
the Study of Core Texts and Ideas at the University of Texas at Austin. She is author of “Moral
and Criminal Responsibility in Plato’s Laws” (American Political Science Review, 2009); Virtue is
Knowledge: The Moral Foundations of Socratic Political Philosophy (University of Chicago Press,
2014); and Wisdom and Character: The Moral Foundations of Aristotelian Political Philosophy
(University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).

With assistance from Anastasia Berg

© 1960 Estate of Leo Strauss
© 2016 Estate of Leo Strauss. All Rights Reserved.

2

2025

Table of Contents
Editor’s Introduction

ii-v

Note on the Leo Strauss Transcript Project

vi-viii

Editorial Headnote

viii

Session 1: Introduction, Minos

1-23

Session 2: Minos

24-54

Session 3: Laws, Book 1

55-79

Session 4: Laws, Book 1

80-105

Session 5: Laws, Book 2

106-135

Session 6: Laws, Book 3

136-166

Session 7: Laws, Book 4

167-192

Session 8: Laws, Book 5

193-219

Session 9: Laws, Book 6

220-247

Session 10: Laws, Book 7

248-275

Session 11: Laws, Book 8

276-305

Session 12: Laws, Book 9

306-334

Session 13: Laws, Book 10

335-364

Session 14: Laws, Book 11

365-394

Session 15: Laws, Book 12

395-427

ii

Editor’s Introduction
Plato’s Laws: Two Courses by Leo Strauss
Lorraine Pangle
University of Texas at Austin
It is a pleasure to be able to help make Strauss’s two courses on the Laws available to a
wider audience. This is a dialogue to which Strauss devoted great time and thought,
beginning around 1930, continuing through the courses he taught in the fall of 1959 at the
University of Chicago and of 1971 at St. John’s College, and culminating in one of his
last books, The Argument and the Action of Plato’s Laws, published shortly after his
death in 1973 by the University of Chicago Press and reissued in 1988. Strauss’s
encounter with the Laws was a key moment in his rediscovery of esoteric writing,
provoked by his ponderings on Avicenna’s strange statement that the Laws is the work of
ancient philosophy on the subject of prophecy or revelation. Prophecy hardly seems to be
a major theme of the Laws, but this comment of Avicenna’s proved to be a golden thread
that led Strauss through the labyrinth of that work and into its deepest recesses. All of his
subsequent studies of political philosophy, both ancient and modern, owe a great deal to
the hermeneutical skills that Strauss developed in studying the Laws in light of the
illuminating comment of Avicenna’s.
The Argument and the Action of Plato’s Laws is a painstakingly close and detailed
commentary. Full of trenchant observations and significant signposts, useful in drawing
together many of the disparate threads of this longest and highly perplexing Platonic
dialogue, The Argument and the Action is nonetheless a dense and difficult work in its
own right, at times not easy to distinguish from a most careful summary. For anyone
undertaking a study of the Laws and especially for those doing so for the first time, these
course transcripts will provide a helpful supplement to that book and perhaps an even
better beginning point. Of the two courses, the 1959 course gives a uniform treatment of
all twelve books of the Laws as well as of the Minos, with interesting brief observations
on every section. The 1971 course, by contrast, gives a much fuller treatment of the first
six books of the Laws, with the exception of 690e-699d, which was apparently covered in
a class session that was not recorded, followed by highlights of the last six books. The
1971 course also offers two extended sets of reflections, the first on the scope and central
themes of the Laws and the second on the possibility of recovering a Platonic
understanding of nature, which may be of special interest to readers seeking perspective
on the whole of Strauss’s thought.
First, through the first several classes of the 1971 course Strauss gradually, layer by layer,
builds up an intriguing introduction to this work and its place in the Platonic corpus. He
begins with Avicenna’s comment that the Laws is the work on prophecy and with
Farabi’s wonderful story of the hermit or pious ascetic who escapes persecution by
speaking the truth, but in such a way as to prevent the guard at the city gate from
believing him. Planting these two seeds, Strauss then highlights the importance of the

iii
profound theme of divine inspiration in the opening of the dialogue, but he also draws
striking contrasts between the Laws and Plato’s Socratic dialogues in ways that suggest a
limited scope and lower theme for the Laws. The Laws tells of what Socrates might have
done if he had not gone to his death at age seventy but instead had fled Athens and had
turned up incognito in another Greek city: it is a dialogue that Socrates never had time for
in his lifetime, but might have had if he had had occasion to talk about laws with two
Dorian strangers. The interlocutors of the dialogue are not only Dorians unacquainted
with philosophy but are old men, and as such most unpromising students of philosophy,
unlike Socrates’s sophisticated, open-minded, passionate young interlocutors in such
dialogues as the Republic and Phaedrus. Strauss thus stresses both the conservative
character of the dialogue and its subphilosophic theme.
However, if the theme of the Laws is law, it is necessary to explore the question of what
law is at its core and at its highest or best. Law is somehow that which “wishes to be
knowledge of what is,” or philosophy, but in this it does not succeed; law is also that
which obviously and publicly proclaims itself to be binding on us and demands our
unquestioning obedience. The very inquiry into what law is, therefore, is paradoxically
subversive, even more so than the inquiry into what justice is. Understanding the relation
of law or nomos to reason or logos leads us into the claim that law is of divine origin and
thence into the whole problem of reason and revelation. Assessing the rationality of laws
requires freedom of speech, but that freedom of speech must be made safe. To that end,
the Athenian in Book 1 says that a healthy city will institute a law of laws, forbidding
questioning the laws with the sole exception that citizens over the age of fifty who have
an improvement to propose may do so privately to the magistrates. In such a spirit of
cautious but dogged public-spiritedness, the three interlocutors then wade intrepidly into
a dialogue with the gods about the aim of law. In the course of doing so the Athenian in
Book 2 proclaims another and deeper law of laws, to which he allows no exceptions: the
law that requires all to proclaim the convergence of virtue with happiness. Again,
however, to point to the unquestionable status of this teaching is paradoxically to invite
and even demand that the reader reflect on what makes this teaching so essential. It is at
just this point in his analysis of the unfolding argument of the Laws that Strauss points
out that the Athenian’s two elderly interlocutors do not and cannot fathom the full
meaning of all that the Athenian is saying. Reverence for the law thus leads the reader if
not the interlocutors by a direct if dimly lit path into the deepest recesses of political
philosophy. The Laws is a dialogue of the very highest order.
At the end of the twenty-third and beginning of the twenty-fourth sessions of the 1971
course, Strauss again takes up the question of the relation of the nomos to logos and the
persistent, insuperable tension that Plato suggests exists between the city as such and
philosophy as such. He points out that the Republic’s solution of philosopher kings and
the modern project of reconceiving of science as a tool for the relief of man’s estate both
fall short of solving the problem, both in different ways in fact demonstrating its
intractability. But then Strauss raises the interesting question of the status of this Platonic
insight. How can the tension between the human political community and philosophy be
a necessary, permanent tension if humanity itself is not permanent? Did Plato, as
Lucretius suggests, illegitimately assume the permanence of the human race, and if so—if

iv
indeed, as Strauss thinks, there almost certainly will not always be human beings—how
great a problem does that present for Plato’s philosophy? Is Plato still justified in
speaking of necessities? Do necessary truths and forms not depend on the existence of a
mind that can hold these truths and forms within it? But if there are no permanent
necessities, can there really be nature or even a world? As Strauss asks, “Would a whole
which does not harbor beings who can be aware of it . . . be a world? Would this be truly
a whole?”
Strauss acknowledges that one can remain “more or less” close to Plato’s thought by
replacing the idea of permanent necessities with that of permanent possibilities. In this
direction Allan Bloom makes the suggestion that if the beings are not permanent perhaps
the “seeds of beings” are, and Walter Berns makes the related suggestion that the ideas or
forms exist as “fundamental potentialities that can be realized when the material is there.”
Yet Strauss insists that this step does not altogether solve the problem. It was, he points
out, indeed already taken as early as the medieval period, as scholars who believed in a
world with a beginning and ending began to speak of permanent essences rather than
permanent beings, thus already ceasing to understand Plato on his own terms. But,
Strauss asks, “are not the essences in need of support by beings—say, by the divine
mind?” Thus as faith in an eternal divine being waned in the modern period, history came
to take the place of nature as the evidently most important context and determinant of
human life, and what is highest—consciousness, thought, culture, morality—comes to
sight as “essentially short-lived.” Thus late modern philosophy would seem to be on
strong ground in arguing that Plato was seriously limited by his ignorance that “the
highest principles themselves are historical.” Yet from Plato’s perspective the conclusion
that “the eternal verities are borne, supported by, the mortal human race” is, Strauss says,
“essentially upside down” or “absolutely against Plato.” Thus the essential nerve of
Platonic thought would seem to rest on an unwarranted assumption.
Nor is it possible to jettison Platonic metaphysics and maintain his political philosophy
intact. “We cannot leave it at picking out, as it were, some golden sentences from Plato
which may serve us as a vehicle to sail through life because they are so evidently sound,”
such as “The unexamined life is not worth living,” or “Death is not the greatest evil.” For
if the modern understanding of humanity’s contingent, accidental emergence is right, if
the highest principles are themselves historical, and, Strauss says: “if this is so,
philosophy changes its meaning radically. It can no longer be what it was from Plato's
point of view, ascent from the cave to the sun, for the simple reason that there is nothing
without the cave. And therefore one cannot strictly speak of the cave. And in particular
the Platonic view of the tension between philosophy and the city, which is implied in the
simile of the cave, becomes untenable. This is, I think, the difficulty which I believe we
must face: that it is very hard to discern a principle which would permit us to
distinguish—in an expression used by a famous philosopher of history—between the
living and the dead in Plato, if we call the living his moral political doctrine, and the dead
his metaphysical one.”
Strauss does not offer a solution to this grave problem or even make clear the degree to
which he thought it could be solved. Instead, quoting the saying of Pascal that “we know
too little to be dogmatists, and too much to be skeptics,” he leaves it at gently suggesting

v
to his students that we are all falling into a dangerous complacency if we are not seriously
troubled by the problem. Such was the vigilant spirit of Strauss, ever watchful to plow up
the seeds of dogmatism that he found sprouting around his own feet.

vi

The Leo Strauss Transcript Project
Leo Strauss is well known as a thinker and writer, but he also had tremendous impact as a
teacher. In the transcripts of his courses one can see Strauss comment on texts, including
many he wrote little or nothing about, and respond generously to student questions and
objections. The transcripts, amounting to more than twice the volume of Strauss’s
published work, will add immensely to the material available to scholars and students of
Strauss’s work.
In the early 1950s mimeographed typescripts of student notes of Strauss’s courses were
distributed among his students. In winter 1954, the first recording, of his course on
Natural Right, was transcribed and distributed to students. Professor Herbert J. Storing
obtained a grant from the Relm Foundation to support the taping and transcription, which
resumed on a regular basis in the winter of 1956 with Strauss’s course “Historicism and
Modern Relativism.” Of the 39 courses Strauss taught at the University of Chicago from
1958 until his departure in 1968, 34 were recorded and transcribed. After he retired from
Chicago, recording of his courses continued at Claremont Men’s College in the spring of
1968 and the fall and spring of 1969 (although the tapes for his last two courses there
have not been located), and at St. John’s College for the four years until his death in
October 1973.
The surviving original audio recordings vary widely in quality and completeness, and
after they had been transcribed, the audiotapes were sometimes reused, leaving the audio
record very incomplete. Beginning in the late 1990s, Stephen Gregory, then the
administrator of the University’s John M. Olin Center for Inquiry into the Theory and
Practice of Democracy funded by the John M. Olin Foundation, initiated the digital
remastering of the surviving tapes by Craig Harding of September Media to ensure their
preservation, improve their audibility, and make possible their eventual publication. This
remastering received financial support from the Olin Center and from the Division of
Preservation and Access of the National Endowment for the Humanities. The remastered
audiofiles are available at the Strauss Center website:
https://leostrausscenter.uchicago.edu/courses.
Strauss permitted the taping and transcribing to go forward, but he did not check the
transcripts or otherwise participate in the project. Accordingly, Strauss’s close associate
and colleague Joseph Cropsey originally put the copyright in his own name, though he
assigned copyright to the Estate of Leo Strauss in 2008. Beginning in 1958 a headnote
was placed at the beginning of each transcript, which read: “This transcription is a written
record of essentially oral material, much of which developed spontaneously in the
classroom and none of which was prepared with publication in mind. The transcription is
made available to a limited number of interested persons, with the understanding that no
use will be made of it that is inconsistent with the private and partly informal origin of
the material. Recipients are emphatically requested not to seek to increase the circulation
of the transcription. This transcription has not been checked, seen, or passed on by the
lecturer.” In 2008, Strauss’s heir, his daughter Jenny Strauss, asked Nathan Tarcov to

vii
succeed Joseph Cropsey as Strauss’s literary executor. They agreed that because of the
widespread circulation of the old, often inaccurate and incomplete transcripts and the
continuing interest in Strauss’s thought and teaching, it would be a service to interested
scholars and students to proceed with publication of the remastered audiofiles and
transcripts. They were encouraged by the fact that Strauss himself signed a contract with
Bantam Books to publish four of the transcripts although in the end none were published.
The University’s Leo Strauss Center, established in 2008, launched a project, presided
over by its director Nathan Tarcov, and managed by Stephen Gregory, to correct the old
transcripts on the basis of the remastered audiofiles as they became available, transcribe
those audiofiles not previously transcribed, and annotate and edit for readability all the
transcripts including those for which no audiofiles survived. This project was supported
by grants from the Winiarski Family Foundation, Mr. Richard S. Shiffrin and Mrs.
Barbara Z. Schiffrin, Earhart Foundation, and the Hertog Foundation, and contributions
from numerous other donors. The Strauss Center was ably assisted in its fundraising
efforts by Nina Botting-Herbst and Patrick McCusker, staff in the Office of the Dean of
the Division of the Social Sciences at the University.
Senior scholars familiar with both Strauss’s work and the texts he taught were
commissioned as editors, with preliminary work done in most cases by student editorial
assistants. The goal in editing the transcripts has been to preserve Strauss’s original
words as much as possible while making the transcripts easier to read. Strauss’s impact
(and indeed his charm) as a teacher is revealed in the sometimes informal character of his
remarks. Readers should make allowance for the oral character of the transcripts. There
are careless phrases, slips of the tongue, repetitions, and possible mistranscriptions.
However enlightening the transcripts are, they cannot be regarded as the equivalent of
works that Strauss himself wrote for publication.

Nathan Tarcov, Editor-in-Chief
Gayle McKeen, Managing Editor
August 2014

Editorial Headnote
This transcript is based upon the original transcript, with the exception of sessions 8,
which is based upon the remastered audiofile. The recording of session 8 was the only
audifile to have survived from this course. The original transcript was made by persons
unknown to us. The transcriber indicated that portions of the tape were inaudible with
ellipses and [inaudible] in square brackets. In these cases, we have kept the ellipses but
not the bracketed word. In cases where the transcriber left a blank space, presumably

viii
because something was inaudible, though we cannot know for sure, we have shown this
with ellipses in square brackets, thus: [. . .].
In the transcript there are multiple instances of Stephanus numbers or page numbers (to
the Loeb edition of the dialogue) in parentheses in the text. It is not clear whether Strauss
said these numbers or whether they were added by the transcriber. We have left them as
they are.
The course was taught in seminar form, with classes (after the first session) beginning
with the reading of a student paper, followed by Strauss’s comments on it, and then
reading aloud of portions of the text followed by Strauss’s comments and responses to
student questions and comments. The reading of the student papers in Strauss’s courses
was not preserved in audiofiles or in original transcripts; nonetheless, the transcript
records Strauss’s comments on the papers.
When the text was read aloud in class, the transcript records the words as they appear in
the edition of the text assigned for the course, and original spelling has been retained.
Citations are included for all passages.
The edition assigned for the course is Plato, The Laws, trans. R. G. Bury, 2 vols. (Loeb
Classical Library, no. 187) (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1942).
This transcript was edited by Lorraine Pangle, with assistance from Anastasia Berg.

The Transcript

1

Session 1: January 6, 1959
Leo Strauss: This seminar will deal with Plato’s Laws. Plato’s Laws consists of twelve
books, which enables us to divide it easily into twelve assignments. This same
arithmetical process tells us that this will leave us four meetings free. Now the first
meeting, it is clear, will be devoted to an introduction, probably the second as well; and it
is possible that I will add one more meeting to the discussion of the first and second
books. And so we will bring about a harmony between reason and chance, if it is a
chance that Plato’s Laws consists of twelve books and our seminar consists of sixteen
meetings. That can be doubted, because after all in both cases we have multiples of four.
But following again the customary ritual, I believe I should say a word, although this is
probably not necessary for everyone here, [about] why we try to read Plato’s Laws. After
all, we are political scientists, and political science as frequently understood has nothing
to do whatever with such books as Plato’s Laws. Now in other words, let us remind
ourselves briefly of how matters stand in political science today, generally speaking.
Political science as it is now mostly understood is a nonphilosophic discipline, and this
character of present-day political science is based on two characteristics. The first is the
distinction between facts and values, according to which any question of the goodness of
political arrangements cannot be answered by human reason; and the second
characteristic of present-day political science—I mean of a very powerful trend in
present-day political science—is the reduction of the political to the subpolitical. The
simplest expression of that is the denial of the meaningfulness of a common good, by
which political science as such would stand or fall. The reduction of the political, in the
first place, to the sociological, and in the last analysis to the psychological. Now the
question is whether there is a connection between these two characteristics of political
science: (a) the distinction between facts and values, and (b) this reduction of the political
to the subpolitical. After all, could not every society be constituted by a value system, 1
this value system constituting the common good of that particular society? In other
words,2 a political science [would be imaginable] which does make use of the distinction
between facts and values and still does not engage in any reduction of the political to the
sociological or psychological. Or is this not possible?
Let us discuss that. Is it not possible to argue as follows: We look at a given society; what
gives it its character and unity and 3 [therefore] makes it a society is its value system. And
this value system can only be described; it cannot be judged in terms of its soundness or
unsoundness. But we cannot deny the primacy of the value system as far as the society is
concerned. Therefore we have no right to reduce the value system—that which makes the
society one, and which is as such political—to something sociological or psychological.
Is this not possible? These old conventionalists, as one may call them, although vulgarly
called the sophists, who said that everything noble or just is by convention, meant
something of this kind. In other words, there was no question of any analysis of the
society, the political, into sociological or psychological things because the political was

2
thought to be, in this sense at any rate, irreducible. But how does it come that in presentday social science this possibility is practically absent, so that the two propositions, i.e.,
the distinction between facts and values and the reduction of the political to the
subpolitical, are taken as synonymous?
Student: I don’t understand exactly what you are saying.
LS: I am very grateful for this remark. I was surprised that there were no objections.
Student: Well, I don’t understand several things, but one thing I don’t understand very
much at all is this. You seem to be identifying a value system with what is political about
a system or a society. At least this is the impression I get, and I wonder if this is quite
true. Seemingly a value system takes into account all sorts of aspects of a society, not
only the political aspect of the society but the sociological, the economic values, the
religious values, and values of other sorts. That is one thing I don’t understand—that is,
what you are doing about that. Another thing I don’t understand is what you mean by a
reduction of the political to the psychological. I mean, I don’t see that one is lower than
the other.
LS: I see. You are perfectly consistent in saying that. I was looking at it from a
nonpositivistic point of view, and you can very well question that. You must in fact
question that. All right, let us forget about the “sub” for one moment. What is the
prevalent approach in the political science today? You have governmental actions taking
place within a constitutional system. That can be described and must be described, but
that would not be regarded as sufficient. You have to go back behind, say, the actions of
parties, Congress, and so on. Behind to what? You go back, as I understand it, from the
formal organization to the informal.
Student: This is certainly one approach. In political science, you can look at either. You
can say . . .
LS: But still, where do we expect to find the explanation of political action? Say a law is
passed and someone leaves it at what he can find out from the Congressional Record
about the actions of the parties and so on. That I believe would be regarded today as
insufficient as an explanation, because a deeper reason would be the reason of those
interests moving—pressure groups or whatever it may be—the merely political agents.
Student: Yes, I suppose you might even go beyond that.
LS: For example?
Student: Well, to the sort of subsystems which produce those interest groups.
LS: Well, all right. Now you speak yourself of subsystems. I do not want to draw any
unfair advantage4 [from] that because you did not mean this in an evaluative sense. I
know that. But at any rate, these subsystems are as such not political. You understand the

3
political actions proper as resultants in some way or other of social groupings which are
not as such political groupings.
Student: As we make the distinction between political and social.
LS: Yes, sure. How well founded . . .
Student: In the way we define words.
LS: Yes, but still the words have a reasonably clear meaning. While it is necessary to
give them the clearest possible meaning, we should not let ourselves be handicapped by
merely verbal considerations. So I think it is no exaggeration to say that the general
tendency of political science today is to understand the political in terms of the
prepolitical or the subpolitical—subpolitical without any value, if you want to. Whether
the “sub” is meant in an evaluative sense can only be proved if it is shown, prior to that,
that the political association has an objectively higher aim than these other groupings.
Sure. We know that.
Student: By “sub” you mean deeper reasons rather than lower in status. Is this what you
are saying?
LS: Well, I mean lower in status, but I cannot expect that you believe that on my saying
so, so let us leave this open and say [that] whatever the status may be, it may be that these
prepolitical things are of equal dignity or perhaps even of higher dignity. I leave this now
entirely open here in my argument with you. But the tendency is surely to explain the
political in terms of the social rather than the other way ’round.
Student: If you want to use this word “sub” in the way that it is normally used, doesn’t it
really mean that the political is determined by more fundamental causes?
LS: Yes, sure. Now that is what Mr. Dennis meant by the term “deeper” which he used.
Sure, you can say deeper in the sense of more profound, but we can also use deeper in the
sense of lower in dignity. We leave this open for the time being. But I have to meet your
other point which is very important. That is to say, why should the values be the
emphatically political? There are values in every sphere. Now let us look at how the
discussion proceeds ordinarily today. If you take such a thing as democracy, freedom, or
however it is called—which of course needs in every case a more precise definition, but
generally speaking we know what we mean by that 5: What is it that people mean when
they talk about the common good? They mean of course also hospitals and bridges. I
know that. But that which is primarily intended if political things as political things are
discussed is, in the case of democracy, a more democratic democracy (a better
democracy) or a less democratic democracy. This is meant by the common good in the
first place: that which united a society in such a way that by this union it acquires its
character as a society. The common good cannot be explained, certainly not sufficiently,
without paying due consideration to the alleged overall political value[s] cherished by
that society. I try to use terms which are as obliging to your point of view as possible. I

4
did not say that there are not values on other levels and of other kinds, but the question is
this. Now if people today analyze a society, they speak of course of the institutions,
naturally. But these institutions are unintelligible unless they are linked up with the
objectives which they are meant to serve, and then, to use this present-day language,
without considering the values for the sake of which these institutions are meant to
function. So the common good, that which is meant to unite the society, cannot be
defined. I mean, either there is a common good (and this common good is necessarily to
be understood in terms of values) or there is no common good (and then the unity of the
society becomes an absolutely insoluble problem).
Student: You are saying then that the institutions of government have to have a goal, or
else it is meaningless. And this is what gives it its meaning. I think we would agree.
LS: Sure.That is what I am very anxious about: to start from such things. And these,
however, are called in the present-day language the values. The point that there can be
values on all levels and in the other associations within the political society is not denied.
But here we are concerned [with] whether the political things as political things are
irreducible to the nonpolitical associations or not. And that means: Is there a common
good of the society or is there not a common good? Now you know that the radical
representatives of your school deny the existence of a common good. You know that?
Student: Well, I am not sure what my school is.
LS: The positivistic school. Don’t take it too seriously, but still sometimes we need such
terms.
Student: Well, I think we would have to argue that later.
LS: We must take it up later, by all means. Now what I tried to say was merely this. The
distinction between facts and values and the denial of the possibility of rationality solving
value questions is one thing; the attempt to reduce the political to the subpolitical is
another thing. And it is not evident that the two things belong necessarily together. But
still, in fact they do belong together, and one can roughly state the connection as follows.
The basis of the fact–value distinction is a distinction which has sometimes been called a
distinction between the is and the ought, with the additional premise that knowledge of
the ought, i.e., of the true ought, is impossible. The is—reality, nature—does not possess
in itself any values. These values are entirely dependent on the spectator, or maybe on the
acting man. Values are specifically human and, furthermore, man is derivative. Man must
ultimately be understood in terms of the nonhuman and—forgive me for saying it—in
terms of the subhuman because, from our ordinary point of view, we regard of course
brutes as subhuman, lacking certain possibilities of a high order which man possesses.
This seems to be the connection between these two premises. At any rate, the
fundamental premise of this kind of science, of which the prevalent school in present-day
political science is a specimen, is that there is no essential difference between man and
brutes. The name for that is evolution. We are now in the year 1959, and this reminds us
of 1859, the year in which Darwin’s6 Origin of7 Species appeared. Therefore we do not

5
have to labor this point. Now this view that there is no essential difference between men
and brutes rests on the broader premise that there are no essential differences at all; there
are only differences of degree, only quantitative differences. And therefore, if this
premise is accepted, all understanding must be fundamentally mathematical, quantitative,
exact. This is the connection between these various points. The alternative to this view is
the assertion that there are essential differences, and the classic representatives of this
view are Plato and Aristotle. This is, then, the overall situation. Either our present-day
social science is wholly unproblematic—and then let us do what the radical positivists
say, i.e., let us forget about all earlier thought because that was folkloristic, based on all
kinds of magic or other prejudices, or at least based on a much lower development of
science, so much so that we cannot learn anything from that. But if there should be a
problem in the present-day value-free social science, then it is necessary to consider
clearly the alternative to this, and the clearest, the most outstanding representatives of the
alternative are Plato and Aristotle. This is the background of quite a few courses which I
give, and in particular of the present course.
Now we can take up the question, although this would be more fruitfully done on another
occasion, whether present-day social science is as unproblematic as it presents itself. But
I would like first to lead up to Plato’s Laws in particular, and by the following
consideration. Aristotle’s Politics is doubtless the most developed and most accessible
presentation of the alternative to present-day social science, but there are certain
advantages which the Platonic presentation has and which the Aristotelian does not have.
Now quite superficially, but not untruly, Aristotle’s Politics is a part of an overall
doctrine regarding the whole, the universe. And it is a part of a cosmology, we can say,
and this cosmology is no longer tenable. I know of no one, however enthusiastic about
Aristotle, who would say that Aristotle’s cosmology can be restored or maintained as he
meant it. Now the case8 [with] Plato is very different. Plato developed a cosmology, as
you probably know, in the Timaeus, but this is done with all kinds of reservations. For
instance, the speaker is not Plato’s main spokesman, Socrates, but Timaeus. And
secondly, Timaeus himself presents this as a likely tale, and he does not regard that 9 [as]
in any way demonstrated. In other words, Plato’s political doctrine is not linked up so
directly with a developed cosmology as Aristotle’s doctrine is.
And then there is a second point which has made Plato particularly attractive throughout
the ages, and that can be stated in the form of this contention. The first question which
man can and must raise is the highest question. Now what is that first question? Say the
most urgent question, to make it still stronger. The most urgent question is the question:
How I should live? How one should live? The most urgent question is not how to get the
means of survival, because that presupposes that survival in the first place is chosen. In
other words, the question is: What is the good life?—the question of the good as far as we
are concerned. But this question of the good is, according to Plato, at the same time the
highest question. So the most urgent question is at the same time the highest question.
The appeal which the Platonic dialogues had throughout the ages up to the present day
can be reduced to this thesis: that [this] is a question which everyone can understand or
can be brought to understand with a very few steps. The question of the number of stars,
and even of the character of stars, of the interior of the earth, or what have you, the

6
question of all kinds of characters of animals or plants—of all these questions a man can
say: I am not interested in that, I don’t care. But the question of the good life is such that
he cannot responsibly say that. That is a question which is necessarily of concern to man.
It is the first question, the most urgent question. And at the same time this primary
question is the highest question, so that in Plato the question of immediate concern to
man is always, one could say, immediately present. There is never a loss of the urgency
of this question however abstruse the discussion may become. Plato is in this sense never
academic, whereas Aristotle is very frequently academic. This is another reason why
Plato has an appeal to us today in particular which Aristotle does not immediately have.
If we then would like to understand Plato’s political doctrine, the question arises, of
course, which Platonic work we should read. The case is not as simple as in Aristotle,
where there is only one book devoted to the political problem as a whole, the Politics. In
Plato we have at least three books which could raise a claim to our attention: the
Republic, the Laws, and the Statesman. Now it would need quite an argument, which is
not advisable to give now, [and] of which I can state only the result here: the political
book of Plato is the Laws. The Republic is rather concerned with establishing the
essential character of political things, the essential limitations of the political, than with
developing a detailed political doctrine. For Plato as well as for Aristotle the guiding
political question is that of the good, or the best, political order. What Plato regarded as
the best political order he tells us in the Laws, not in the Republic. Of course apparently
he tells us in the Republic, but one could show without too great difficulties that the claim
raised in the Republic on behalf of that scheme, communism and so on, is not meant
seriously by Plato. His concrete answer to the question of the best regime is found only in
the Laws. And the Statesman is not a political book at all; it is a part of an attempt to
answer the question of what knowledge is. The Statesman belongs to a trilogy beginning
with the Theaetetus and [is] in between [it and] the Sophist, and this trilogy is devoted to
the question: What is knowledge? And part of that question is: What is political
knowledge? Because political knowledge is the knowledge possessed by the statesman or
king. That is the context in which Plato discusses the statesman in the Statesman, not for
the sake of politics. Externally this appears very simply in this form: The interlocutors in
the Statesman are young mathematicians, and the chief speaker is not Socrates but a
philosopher called the Stranger from Elea, whereas the interlocutors in the Laws are two
old men stemming from highly renowned political societies, people of long political
experience. They are the natural addressees of a political discussion proper. Young
mathematicians are not the natural, the competent addressees of a political discussion. In
the Republic the addressees are also very young men, men without political experience. I
do not say, God forbid that one should not study the Republic and the Statesman, but I
only state the case for the Laws in particular. One could also make a very strong case for
reading the Republic as well as for reading the Statesman, but that is not what my duty is
today.
Now if we want to turn then to the Laws, we would of course have to raise a much
broader question concerning all Platonic writings, and that is the fact that Plato’s writings
are all dialogues, not treatises as Aristotle’s Politics, for instance, is a treatise. One would
have to raise the question: Why did Plato write dialogues and not treatises, and can one

7
read dialogues in the way in which one reads treatises? That question we can answer in
this course only by practice, not by a thematic discussion. The most striking fact at a first
glance regarding the Laws is that it is the only Platonic dialogue in which Socrates is
absent. In all other Platonic dialogues Socrates is present, either as the chief speaker or as
a silent listener, as in some of them. Here Socrates is absent. Now there is a simple
explanation of that. The dialogue, as you will see, takes place on the island of Crete—and
Socrates was notorious for never having left Athens except when he was ordered to do so
in his capacity as an Athenian soldier, and there was never an Athenian expedition to
Crete in the crucial time. But of course that is, as you see immediately, a very poor
explanation, because why did Plato locate this dialogue on Crete in the first place? That
we have to understand.
Now in the traditional order of the Platonic dialogues—you know they have come down
to us in manuscripts, and there is a certain order there which in this form does not stem
from Plato, at least it is not certain that it stems from Plato. But still this order was made
by people of much greater competence than we have. Now in this order the Laws is
preceded by a very small dialogue called Minos. Minos was thought to be the legislator of
the Cretans, and Minos occurs in Plato’s Laws10 [itself]. Now the Minos was apparently
thought to be an introduction to the Laws. Today the Minos is generally regarded as
spurious, but that is an absolutely uninteresting consideration because no one knows that,
and it has to be understood even if it was not written by Plato. Now the Minos is the
traditional introduction to the Laws, and only in the Minos can we hope to get an
explanation of why Plato located this dialogue in the island of Crete. So I suggest that we
begin our discussion with an analysis of the Minos as if it were in corpore vile,i as the
Roman lawyers say, in a vile body 11 [on] which we can make an experiment which could
not be tolerated12 [on] a noble body. You know, say, guinea pigs, and not to say a slave,
which is probably what the Roman lawyers thought of. Let us take then the Minos.
The Minos is accessible in the English translation in the Loeb Classical Library, in
volume 8, the volume beginning with the Charmides. Now once we begin to discuss [it],
we of course have to go into all kinds of details, some of which may seem to be
unimportant and uninteresting. Therefore I would like to make it clear why it is a
meaningful and not [an] antiquarian enterprise if we discuss the Minos at some length. I
state therefore the general points which I have made before. If the character of presentday social science is not fundamentally satisfactory, it becomes necessary to understand
an alternative to present-day social science, and the classic form of that alternative is
Platonic and Aristotelian political science. There are good reasons for putting the
emphasis on Aristotle; there are also very good reasons for putting the emphasis on Plato.
That is not a question on this level of the argument. But if one wants to understand
Plato’s political science, one must study above all the Laws. Study means of course to
study carefully, because otherwise we can [just] as well read Sabine’s summary ii of the
Laws and say that this is all there is to it. Is this sufficient? I mean this very seriously,
although it may sound a bit light. I mean this very literally 13. But is there any difficulty
here? Any possibility of objection? I would like to dispose of that.
i Fiat experimentum in corpore vili: Let the experiment be made on a worthless body.
ii

See George Sabine, A History of Political Theory (1937) (and subsequent editions).

8

Student: I would like to ask a question about the course approach. Will it be primarily
directed simply towards the understanding of the Laws, i.e., the exposition of the text and
the understanding of what Plato meant, and that sort of thing, or else will it be an attempt
to do that and also to compare it with more modern problems and points of view?
LS: I would say that if we, as people living in the middle of the twentieth century, try to
understand Plato, we cannot help paying attention, regardless of explicitly or implicitly,
to present-day views. You must not forget that there is a very large and deep gulf
separating us from Plato, for good or ill. Plato doesn’t breach the gulf for us: we have to
do that. There are certain things which we do not understand to begin with. You know?
And14 we have to do certain things which Plato didn’t do and which probably also the
traditional interpreters, and maybe the present-day interpreters, do not do. But we have to
do it. To give you a very simple example from an earlier course which you attended,
Plato and Aristotle’s political doctrines are concerned with the thing they call the polis.
And they also speak of the politeia. You remember these terms? Now the translation for
the polis is the city-state or the state; the translation for politeia is the constitution. And
someone who reads only the English translation will say: Well, all right, that is what they
are talking about; Plato and Aristotle are talking about the city-state and the constitution.
But this gives an entirely wrong understanding of what Plato and Aristotle do. It is
therefore necessary to learn some Greek, at least for someone like myself, and to explain
then what precisely does this “polis” mean. I explained in this other course that it is much
better not to translate in this way. I would always translate polis by city and wouldn’t
care about it: it would appear from the context that it doesn’t mean the city of London,
Threadneedle Street, and all this sort of thing. But for the understanding I would think it
is much better to think of the country—[as] when people say “The country is in danger,”
or “Right or wrong, my country”—than of anything like “state” if one wants to
understand what Plato and Aristotle are talking about. That is part of that “bridging the
gulf” of which I spoke.
But the question concerns not only terms, although the difficulties are in a way
concentrated in the terms, but also thoughts: you know, certain kinds of questions which
to Plato and his contemporaries were obviously the most important questions which are
no longer so evidently the most important questions. [Today] when you read 15 people—
unfortunately not academic people most of the time, but somewhat marginal people,
freelance writers or however they are called—what is for them the really grave question?
I believe I am not wrong in saying culture. Something has gone wrong with culture, they
say. I just read an article to this effect. And what is culture? I mean of course not what
sociologists understand by popular and other culture, but they have a profounder
understanding of that, where you have genuine philosophy, genuine art, genuine religion,
for example. This would be regarded by many people today as the question of utmost
importance. For Plato and Aristotle the question was the question of the good polis. The
term culture would not be translatable into their language. And the good polis would be
characterized by the predominance within the polis of the good people,16 [whoever] the
good people may be. You know you cannot immediately translate the thought of Plato
and Aristotle into our present-day language, and least of all into our present-day

9
academic language, because the ordinary man, the man with common sense, has a more
direct access to earlier thought than the superscientific social scientist, you know. The
super social scientist believes [himself] to be freer from all prejudices than the simple
man in the street; in fact, he makes many more dubious presuppositions than the simple
man in the street. Only the practice, only the doing of the thing as distinguished from the
general methodological observations, can be of any help. Was this answer of any use?
Student: Yes, I think so.
LS: But you made one remark which is absolutely justified and which I must satisfy now
before we can go on: that you see, if with a number of conditional clauses, the
reasonableness of what we want to do. That is necessary. And I repeat, these conditions
are these: perhaps present-day positivistic social science is a problem; then we must
understand Plato and Aristotle. This you will have to believe, please, on the basis of my
longer experience:17 Plato and Aristotle are the greatest authorities regarding the
alternative. Then it is really a question of convenience whether we read Aristotle’s
Politics or Plato’s Laws. That’s all right. That makes sense?
Student: Yes.
LS: The only thing I say is this. If we want to understand Plato, we cannot take it as
something which doesn’t require any effort on our part. It requires a very great effort.
There is no reason to assume that this should be something which a high school boy
would understand adequately at a first hearing. This is the tacit premise of many of the
ordinary histories of political thought. That is unlikely, I would say, suppressing better
knowledge that tells me it is impossible. So we have to do that. You can also state the
question as follows. The Minos begins with a question raised by Socrates which I
translate inadequately as follows: What is law? iii Now what about this question, is this a
question the reasonableness of which we could admit even today?
Student: Yes.
LS: All right. So in other words, we are sure we deal here with a pertinent and, I think we
could also add here, an important question.
Student: That is right. It is an important question.
LS: More we don’t really need. The question thus is 18 whether Socrates’s answer to that
question, or perhaps his analysis of the question, is good. [And that we can only answer
after we have studied it.] It may be very poor and despicable in the end; then we were
mistaken in making this adventure, but even that would not be wholly lost, because we
would have learned not to touch Plato, [or] at least the Minos, again. You know, that
happens even in positivistic studies. You know, they make quite a few studies which
sound very promising to begin with and later on they prove to be very ill-conceived. I
iii Minos 313a.

10
have been told that certain studies about the authoritarian personality, which were
regarded ten years ago as a triumph of modern social science, are now regarded as
something which had better not have been undertaken. So we mustn’t be afraid of a
failure, because you learn from that.
But after having read this first sentence, we notice one thing—at least if we have read any
other Platonic dialogues—and that is that this is a very strange beginning for a Platonic
dialogue, to begin abruptly with the question: What is? Let me mention this little point. I
spoke before of the essential differences—that the key proposition of Plato and Aristotle
is that there are essential differences. Now the essential differences presuppose something
like essences. But we shouldn’t be frightened by that word. The essence becomes clear to
us, let us say, when we raise the question “What is?” For example: What is a dog? What
is a lion? What is a body? What is a law? This question—What is?—is the Socratic
question, universally prior to anything. While this question is raised in many dialogues—
e.g., What is courage? What is justice?—Socrates never begins with that. Here in this
dialogue we have this unusually abrupt beginning. Now it is particularly surprising if we
consider another fact. There was a contemporary of Plato, Xenophon, who was also a
direct pupil of Socrates. Now in Xenophon’s works, the question “What is law?” is also
raised. I would like to say [that] the question “What is law?” in this form, in this explicit
form, is never raised elsewhere in the Platonic dialogues. But in Xenophon’s dialogues
the question is raised by Alcibiades in a conversation with his guardian, Pericles—you
know Pericles, the great Athenian. And this raising the question of what law is is
presented by Xenophon as a sign of the frivolity of Alcibiades. This question “What is
law?”—the answer to which reveals the whole mystery of law—can be raised by a man
of considerable levity, as Alcibiades undoubtedly was.
Now here in the dialogue which has come down to us as a Platonic dialogue, Socrates
himself abruptly begins the conversation with a nameless Athenian: “What is law?” [He
just meets him in the marketplace, as it were],19 and buttonholes him, and instead of
asking him, “How are you?” or, “It’s a nice day today, isn’t it?” he says, “What is
law?”—as if this were a subject which you could discuss without some preparation, and
even the very question of which cannot be raised without a proper preparation. By the
way, this is a dialogue only between Socrates and a single man, a single interlocutor, who
is called “companion” in this translation. That is all right, although I would translate it by
“comrade” in spite of the fact that the word comrade has today this obnoxious
implication. It is not entirely alien to the Greek word, because hetairos, while of course
also meaning a friend, had a political connotation. The political clubs were called
hetaireia, collections of comrades, and therefore I think that should not be forgotten.
These clubs were oligarchic clubs, not democratic clubs. That is not unimportant. But
what about this abrupt beginning? In such cases one must20 [ask], if one does not want to
speculate aimlessly: Are there any parallels to that in the Platonic dialogues? And as a
mater of fact there is a single parallel: another dialogue called Hipparchus. We have to
consider that for a moment to understand that.
The Hipparchus also begins with Socrates raising abruptly a question. “What is loving of
gain?” “What is greed?” you could almost say. These two dialogues, the Minos and the

11
Hipparchus, are akin for the additional reason that they are the only dialogues with such
nameless comrades. There are no other dialogues of this kind. Furthermore, these are the
only dialogues—the Minos and the Hipparchus—whose titles designate individual
human beings—Minos is a human being and Hipparchus is a human being—but human
beings who are not characters in the dialogues. You see, when he calls a dialogue
Phaedrus, Phaedrus is an interlocutor, and the Gorgias, Gorgias is in the dialogue. And
then he has titles not indicating individuals, like Republic, [and] they indicate the subject
matter, or Symposium and Banquet, and these indicate the occasion. But in no cases other
than these two do you find proper names21 in the titles, [names] of such individuals as are
not characters in the dialogue but [rather the] subject matter of the conversation within
the dialogue. So these two dialogues obviously belong together, and we must see what we
can learn from that.
These two men, Minos and Hipparchus, were people dead long before Socrates’s time.
Minos was said to be the legislator of Crete, say, a thousand years ago, and Hipparchus
was the famous Athenian tyrant who was murdered about fifty or sixty years before
Socrates was born. Now in both dialogues these themes, the Cretan legislator and the
Athenian tyrant, are brought up by Socrates, and in both cases these famous men are
highly praised by Socrates. I must say a few words about the Hipparchus. The man
highly praised in the Hipparchus is Hipparchus, the son of Pisistratus, the famous
Athenian tyrant. Both Hipparchus and his father were generally known as tyrants.
Hipparchus had been murdered by Harmodius and Aristogeiton, who were magnified as
liberators of Athens by the Athenian democracy. Socrates does not mention these things,
but he praises Hipparchus most highly and he explicitly attacks the opinion of the many
regarding the cause of Hipparchus’s murder. In the Hipparchus Socrates attacks an
Athenian myth regarding Hipparchus. The myth was that this was a love affair, and [that
there was] some improper conduct on the part of Hipparchus. But Socrates says no, that
Hipparchus was murdered by an accident and that he was really a very wise and
respectable man. Similarly, in the Minos Socrates attacks an Athenian myth regarding
Minos. To exaggerate a bit, in the Hipparchus Socrates vindicates an Athenian tyrant as a
wise and good man.
Now this follows easily from the subject matter of this dialogue, which is love of gain or
greed. Love of gain is generally regarded, today as well as in antiquity, as something bad
or base. But Socrates proves the paradoxical thesis that love of gain is not bad or base,
not to say that it is good or noble. Now the tyrant is the most successful lover of gain. It is
clear—you can see this even today: for example, if Mr. Khrushchev has any desire which
can be satisfied only by money, he surely can satisfy it much better than not only we but
even President Eisenhower [can]. So a tyrant is really the wealthiest man in the
community; he can dispose of the whole thing. Therefore, the most successful lover of
gain is the tyrant. By vindicating the love of gain, which Socrates does, he vindicates in a
sense tyranny. But this is not explicitly said in the Hipparchus. That Athenian tyrant is
mentioned because a saying of Hipparchus’s illuminates the conversational situation. The
interlocutor there is afraid that Socrates might try to deceive him, because Socrates made
this strange assertion that love of gain is not bad. Thereupon Socrates quotes
Hipparchus’s saying: Do not deceive a friend. Hipparchus had erected statues or

12
something like statues in Athens and around Athens and one inscription was, “Do not
deceive a friend.” And on the other side of this pillar he said, “Walk thinking just
thoughts.” In other words, lead a just life, you could say. But the interpretation of that is
the other statement: A just man is a man who does not deceive friends. You see this is of
course an ambiguous saying. It may mean that you may deceive a non-friend or an
enemy, and then that would mean then, in the context, justice consists of helping friends
and hurting enemies. Does this ring any bells, this view of justice?
Student: It is a view advanced by one of the speakers in the Republic.
LS: Yes. Polemarchus. And there is even more to that; that has a longer, broader history,
but let us leave it at that. So there is a view we know. We can also link it up with the
issue [of] love of gain. Love of gain in the common sense is of course something linked
up with deception. When we speak of a man who loves gain, we mean that he is a
dishonest man. 22 But if love of gain is good or may be good, as Socrates contends,
deception may be good for the same reason. But this much about the Hipparchus, and
that only to indicate this is a very strange thing. While the subject of the Hipparchus may
be said to be tyranny, the subject of the Minos is the opposite of tyranny, namely, law,
rule of law. The first sentence, to which I return, runs as follows, more literally
translated: What is law for us? Not, as the translator says, “Tell me what is law.” He
doesn’t say, “Tell me.” It is much more abrupt: “What is law for us?” It is ambiguous,
and it can mean “What is a law in our opinion?”—in other words, in our opinion: you[rs],
Mr. X[’s], and mine. But it can of course also mean more. That is the minimum extent:
when you speak of you and I, the minimum is two. What is the maximum extent of “we”?
All men, we thinking beings, we human beings. But there is a very interesting inbetween. What is that?
Student: Some idea of the state, the polis in this case.
LS: We Athenians. That is it. And I believe the context would show that this “We
Athenians” is the decisive meaning here. What is law in the opinion of the Athenians?
Now clearly, what is law for us, the Athenians? The Athenian law. That is clear. But at
the end of this conversation, which is very short—which probably has not taken more
than one hour—the law in the highest sense proves to be the law of Minos, the Cretan
law. And mind you, Minos was an enemy of Athens, as will be made very clear. Now if
this is so, if the law par excellence is the law of Minos, an enemy of Athens, what light
does it throw on the law of Athens? Well, that is really simple logic. The best law is the
law of Minos. What follows from that regarding the Athenian law? Come now, it is really
very simple; I believe that even in a grade school I would get an answer. Well, the
Athenian law is not the best law. It is subject to criticism. Now if we take the two
dialogues together, in the Hipparchus we see an Athenian tyrant was good and wise, but
a tyrant is an unsavory man and law is much better than the tyrant. iv Now let us therefore
iv

Strauss discusses the relation between the Minos and the Hipparchus along similar lines in his
essay “On the Minos,” in Leo Strauss, Liberalism Ancient and Modern (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1968; reprint, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995), 65-75. Additionally,
he returns to the points he presumably made here at the beginning of session 2.

13
look at Athenian law. All right, let us then look at law. But then we would get not the
Athenian law but a foreign law as the best law. Both dialogues are strangely dangerous,
one could say. These are delicate subjects. Why then does Socrates take up this very
delicate question in a conversation with nameless comrades?v —everyone with perfect
frankness and without any irony or hesitation or what not.
Now if we look at the other Platonic dialogues, I mean any other dialogue other than the
Apology, we see that that is not true. Nowhere do we find in any Platonic dialogue
Socrates engaged in a conversation 23 [in] the marketplace with anybody, with people who
have no special aptitude for that. Whether Plato did it or whether a pupil did 24 is a
question which we cannot decide and which we need not decide. There is a need for such
dialogues in which Socrates buttonholes people in the marketplace without any
preparation and addresses to them the most important questions, the question “What is
law?” and the question “What is love of gain?” Because love of gain means of course
also love of the good, as is made clear in the dialogue25 the Hipparchus. And then we see
immediately [what kind of troubles Socrates would have come into all the time] if he had
done it habitually,26 namely, in the first case by praising an Athenian tyrant to a complete
stranger, and then praising foreign law and thus criticizing implicitly the Athenian law.
So that seems to me to be the context in which one has to read the Minos. Now let us turn
to the text itself.
[Socrates:] What is law for us?
[Companion:] Which law, or what kind of law are you asking about, Socrates?
[Soc.:] What does it mean? Does a law differ from a law in this very respect, namely, as
far as its being a law is concerned? Consider what I happen to ask you. For I ask you as if
I were asking you in addition, or higher up, what is gold: and if you would ask me higher
up, in the same way, what kind of gold do I say, I believe you would not have raised the
question properly. For gold does not differ from gold qua gold.vi
And therefore if I raise the question “What is gold?” I want to have the chemical formula
of gold and not have a description of this particular gold found in California in a river,
and so on. That is clear. That is an old story in all Platonic dialogues—that people do not
understand the “what is” question and have to be introduced to that. But let us look at it a
bit more closely. Socrates asks: What is law? The first reaction of the speaker is: Which
law? In other words, he assumes that there are many laws, and this many of course exists
on various levels: [first], the one legal code consists of many legal provisions and
secondly, there are many legal codes. So that is clear. This manyness, we shall see, is a
problem. That is, in the perspective of this dialogue, the problem, i.e., that there are many
laws, either as parts of a code or the manyness of codes. Socrates tries to deny that
manyness; the interlocutor stresses it. Now the example which Socrates uses here in order
to make clear the question is that of gold. The examples in Platonic dialogues are never
chosen at random, and therefore one must raise the question [of] why the first example
which occurs to him is that of gold. That illuminates the situation. What does every child
know about gold?
vi
vi

Minos 313a-b. Strauss’s translation.
Minos 313a-b. Strauss’s translation.

14

Student: It is valuable.
LS: Precious. And what about the proposition that law is precious, is that a strange
assertion? It is what every decent man would say, generally speaking, prior to deeper
observations regarding this particular law. So that is clear. Now then he goes on: “If I
were asking you higher up, as I say, gold . . . I believe you would not have asked
properly, for neither gold differs from gold nor stone from stone as far as its being stone
and gold is concerned.”vii Now, you see, he introduces another example [or] illustration,
stones. What is the relation of gold and stone?
Student: Stone is very common and base.
LS: Stone is at the opposite pole, you can say. If you take a stone and try to sell it in a
pawn shop, you will see the difference immediately. But on the other hand?
Student: Both are part of the same genus.
LS: That is indicated here by the fact that their position is changed. You noticed that?
“Gold does not differ from gold nor stone from stone regarding being stone.” In other
words, these reflections on when and how we use such things are in the case of a writer
like Plato, although he is not the only one of this kind, fully developed. This rhetoric, this
knowledge of how we speak, is fully explicit in the minds of writers like Plato so that he
can apply it properly. Now there is of course a great variety of such cases. But we can say
there is a certain emotional character when we use that word. For example, the other may
be particularly dense, and we try to awaken him out of his sleep by saying, “Look,” and
then we call his name. But there are also other cases, and they cannot be decisive. There
are cases in Platonic dialogues when one has the distinct impression that the fellow is
begging for mercy because he is squeezed, and then he says, “Socrates.” But it can also
have the awakening effect. [Later], we will get27 clearer examples of that.
Now then in the immediate sequel, where we stopped, Socrates refutes the first
definition:viii “Does speech also seem to be the said, or sight the seen thing, or hearing the
heard thing? Or is speech something different from the spoken thing, and sight something
different from the seen things, and hearing something different from the heard things; and
hence also law something different from the things established by law? Does it seem to
be in this case, or how?”ix—“how” meaning, if you don’t agree with me. And the
interlocutor says: “It has now come to sight to me as something different.” x
Now unfortunately these things cannot be very well translated into English, and therefore
I must explain. Now the Greek word for law is nomos, and the interlocutor had said that
vii

Minos 313a-b. The ellipses presumably indicate that Strauss omitted a portion of the passage.
The “first definition” is given in the Loeb edition as follows: “Well, what else should law be,
Socrates, but things loyally accepted?” (313a).
ix
Minos 313b-c.
x
Minos 313c.
viii

15
nomos is equal to nomizomena, i.e., customs or usages. And now Socrates seems to make
or to use an argument of a purely verbal nature. He says: Let us look at something else;
logos, speech, is equal to legomena, the spoken things. Now it will be easier for me to say
this in English: sight, seen things; hearing, heard things. Now what is the difference
between sight and seen things? Because nomos, law, is now coming to sight as something
akin to sight, and not things seen. The first suggestion was law is something inanimate, a
product, in itself lifeless. Now by this seemingly verbal consideration, it is suggested that
law is akin [to] or of the same kind as acts of the mind, e.g., seeing, hearing, speaking—
because speaking does not mean of course giving sounds, meaningless sounds, but
rational speech. Now this is then the first counterthesis of Socrates: Law is not a mere
object of the mind or a product of the mind; law is an act of the mind. You see, you must
always distinguish in the Platonic dialogue everything between the arguments by which
Socrates influences a speaker and the thought which he is trying to convey. The
arguments are sometimes of a fantastically sophistical character, but what he is driving at
is always very important. And this, what I call 28 exaggeration, the sophistic argument, is
simply an attempt to use a kind of shorthand. The argument is not a strict argument, but
what he is driving at is always worthwhile.
Now let us consider the thesis. We say that law is something lifeless. We know that. That
is a view which arises which is intelligible to every man who has given any thought to
law. What about the alternative proposition which is now made, that law is not lifeless
but living, and living by virtue of the fact that it consists in acts of the mind? Have you
ever heard this, or does it make sense to you without ever having heard it before? How
does a law live?
Student: Only in the sense that it is creative or created.
LS: Yes, but one doesn’t even have to go so far. For example, the law lives in the acts of
the judges. Now this act of the judge is in every case a mental act, even if it consists only
of subsuming this particular case under a legal rule. This subsumption, this recognition
that it falls under the rule, is a mental act. That is the life of the law on the lowest level.
You are quite right that the question of the legislator is even more important; we come to
that.
Student: But also you could say in this case it is a living thing because it is custom, and
custom is also something living.
LS: But that is not clear. You see, you must not start from any romantic notions. Custom
as custom is merely something which happens. That requires a long reflection to show
that it is living. If this word custom creates a difficulty, think of rule: a rule could be a
mere object of your thought. But the point here is that the law is not an object of thought
as the rule is, but it is an act of the mind. Do you see the difference, that a mathematical
law is as such not an act of the mind but an object of the mind? Here the attempt is made
to understand the law as an act of the mind. We must see. Nomos and act of the mind.
Which kind of act? Now I draw your attention to another thing. He gives here three
examples. The examples are speech, sight, and hearing. Now it is a general rule in Plato,

16
which I know only from practice—in other words, not from an explicit statement—that
whenever we find an enumeration, what is in the center is most important—most
important not absolutely but in the context. Now here we have sight in the center. We
must see whether law does not have something to do with sight in particular; whether this
will come out we must see. At any rate, again we see here [that] nomos is one. The act of
the mind in all these cases is singular. You see again this repetition of the problem of the
one and the many, which we now cannot yet interpret.
Now the first definition is disposed of. The interlocutor has seen immediately that law is
more akin to sight than to things seen. Whether he is wise in admitting that is not yet
settled. Perhaps we would raise all kinds of objections that law is really not an act of the
mind. But he is satisfied by this simple verbal similarity between nomos, logos and so
on29 [and] these passive expressions, things believed in, things seen, and so on.
Student: The relation between the seen things and seeing, the heard things and hearing,
is unambiguous in Greek. That is very ambiguous, of course, in nomos, logos and so on.
But it seems to be somehow halfway between the two, this legomena, to me. This logos
and legomena do not seem to be as clear a case as the others. I wonder if you have
something to say about that.
LS: No, no. The clearest case is doubtlessly that of the sense perception here, because
logos, [the Greek word here for speech, also means for example, proportion].30 In other
words, something which in itself is an object rather than a subject.
Student: Well, psychologically speaking, it here seems to provide a sort of link between
the nomos and the other, but I thought there might be some other parallelism.
LS: Does anyone have it here, so that he might read the next speech? That way we can
make better headway.
Reader: xi
[Soc.:]xii What then would law be?xiii Let us consider it in this way. Suppose someone had
asked us about what was stated just now: Since you say it is by sight that things seen are
seen, what is this sight whereby they are seen? Our answer to him would have been: That
sensation which shows objects by means of the eyes. And if he had asked us again: Well
then, since it is by hearing that things heard are heard, what is hearing? Our answer to
him would have been: That sensation which shows us sounds by means of the ears. In the
same way then, suppose he should also ask us: Since it is by law that loyally accepted
things [ta nomizomena] are so accepted [nomizetai], what is this law whereby they are so
xi

Following Strauss’s longstanding practice, a designated student served as reader throughout the
course. The student read from the Loeb edition, and Greek terms were interjected by Strauss.
xii
The transcript does not record the readers reading aloud the interlocutors’ names before giving
the content of their speech (presumably, reading them aloud would have been unnecessary, as
these were available in the written text which was before them). The editors have inserted the
interlocutors’ names (as these are given in the Loeb, i.e., “[Soc.:]”, “[Com.:]”, etc.) for clarity.
xiii
In the Loeb: “Now what can law be?”

17
accepted? Is it some sensation or showing, as when things learnt are learnt [manthanetai]
by knowledge [episteme] showing them, or some discovery, as when things discovered
are discovered [eurisketai]—for instance, the causes of health and sickness by medicine,
or the designs of the gods, as the prophets say, by prophecy for art [technē] is surely our
discovery of things, is it not?xiv (313e-14b)
LS: I mention in passing that when he speaks of these two arts here, medicine and
soothsaying, you see that he says in the case of the soothsayer: “as the soothsayers
assert.” He doesn’t say in the case of the physicians that the physicians assert. That is a
problem, whether the art of soothsaying is a genuine art. But this I mention only in
passing. But you see here at the beginning that Socrates does something 31 which he does
frequently, namely, that he makes a dialogue within a dialogue. He says: If someone
would ask the two of us, then we would answer that and that. This is a dialogue within
the dialogue. Why does he do it? What is the use of this device?
Student: It takes the pressure off the interlocutor. If he is beginning to feel the weight, it
eases him.
LS: In other words, Socrates presents himself as being in the same boat with the
interlocutor. They are together; they are allies. And they are both the people asked. But
who is the asker?
Student: Socrates.
LS: Again Socrates. So it is really ironical, clearly. An act of humanity. That is to say, an
act of humanity is an act of irony. Never forget that. I mean this quite seriously.
Student: But it also allows him to make a conclusion here which would otherwise
perhaps never have been made.
LS: He can make suggestions, surely. But it is a remarkable device which always strikes
our attention. Now here I must skip quite a few things. But you see, here Socrates takes
up two of the examples mentioned before, i.e., sight and hearing. Sight and hearing have
in common that they are sense perceptions, sense perceptions through the eyes and the
ears respectively. What do we see through the eyes? Pragmata, things. Pragma
corresponds to the Latin word res, which means things to be handled. It does not mean
beings. The Greeks have a different word for being, and in Latin they have an unofficial
word for that, ens, later on. But what about the ear? What does sense perception through
the ear make manifest to us? Things?
Student: Sounds.
LS: Sounds. That is also worthy of reflection: that our perception of things is visual
perception, not through the ears. The thing as thing is an object of the eye rather than the
ear. Now what about the third possibility which he mentioned before, speech or logos.
xiv

The Greek words in brackets have been inserted by the editor.

18
This, as you see here, is divided by Socrates into two possibilities. Learning, manthanein,
from which the word mathematics is derived, and let us say science. We know now that
law is a mental act. But is it an act of sense perception, or is it an act of science, or is it an
act of art? Now art means of course never what it means now: capital A, you know, fine
art. Art means a productive skill, e.g., [that of the] shoemaker, [the] carpenter, and of
course also the poets, but not they particularly. Now what would you say, by the way, if
you were confronted by this proposition: Law is a mental act, but there are three kinds of
mental acts which we consider, i.e., sense perception, science, and art? What would you
say? To specify this, he coordinates two things: art, and invention or discovery.
Invention, we could perhaps say; I believe that no one would say it is sense perception.
So the question would be: Is it like science, that is to say, theoretical, theoretical
knowledge, or is it productive knowledge, productive practical knowledge? That is the
question. We will see this question goes through the rest of the dialogue, and not for bad
reasons. Let us reflect for one moment why this is really a difficult question: What kind
of knowledge is implied in, or is the essence of, law?
Student: Doesn’t the word for discovery also mean invention?
LS: Yes, it means both. Now let us look at this. If you have a law here, some law, say the
present tax law with the exemptions and what not. Is this law in existence prior to human
activity, prior to human production? I believe it is safe to say that it is a product of human
production. And from this point of view law would be akin to the products of arts. So like
the shoemaker produces shoes, the lawmaker produces laws.
Student: I was wondering, in the first case laws were treated as inanimate, and then came
to transfer to animate. And in this first discussion of lawmakers he discussed physicians
and seers. This would presumably correspond with the earlier treatment of laws as
inanimate, and then a later development corresponding to the animate things, but here it
corresponds not to the artist but to the product of the art.
LS: Yes, that is the difficulty. But all right, I will try to avoid it—although I do not know
whether I can—that law is a mental act and not a product. Now is the mental act which is
the essence of the law an art of production or an art of mental perceptions? Now I can
answer your question with this simple means of Socrates: the law produces
nomizomena. So just as the pills of the physician, the things which are said to make
people well, correspond to the customs or usages, and the act which produces it is called
law, just as in the other case it is called the medical art. That is the simple way of
disposing of that difficulty. I should have avoided the word law; let us say legal provision
in order to get some verbal clarity. Legal provisions are made by an art, by a human art
called law. That makes sense. But what about the proposition that law, the art which
produces legal provisions, must have the character of a theoretical science and cannot be
understood as an analogon to the cobbler, carpenter, etc. What about that proposition?
Student: Doesn’t it mean that it would have to have objects that do not change?

19
LS: Just as the foot of man changes, of course, but doesn’t change so considerably that if
a good shoemaker makes a pair of shoes they can last in the case of a grown-up man for a
very long time, there can also be a legal provision which can last for one or two decades,
or maybe even for a century, but no legal provision can last forever. I see no difficulty
here.
Student: You mean to say that there are laws in every society?
LS: But understood to be changeable.
Student: Is the difference between the discovery that goes with art and what we learn
from science clarified here?
LS: The ambiguity here is deliberate, and I would have to anticipate other developments
in order to discuss it. For this reason, I don’t want to go into that. I simplified it by simply
putting down art as production and science as purely cognitive, not practical. But the
question is this: You referred to the question of change and unchangeability. Now let me
say this again in advance of any further discussion. The question of the changeability of
laws plays a very great role. We see that almost immediately. And for certain reasons,
Socrates embarks on a quest for unchangeable laws, if I may exaggerate it a bit. But the
very strange thing is that there is not any reference or allusion to something which every
one of us would think today if the question of unchangeable laws would come up. And
what is that?
Student: The ancestral laws.
LS: Yes, that is meant to be but that is only a delusion.
Student: Natural law.
LS: Natural law. There is not an allusion to that. So natural law is out of the question for
some reasons which we will later discuss. But precisely because there is no reference to
natural law, the question of science becomes so important, namely this: If a legislator
wants to establish a legal provision and if it is to be good, he must know the situation; he
must know the end for which he lays down the law. But for a legal code and for a broader
legislative purpose, he must know much more than the present situation. To reduce it to a
simple proposition: He must know the nature of man. He must know what32 the end of
man [is]. Now is the nature of man and the end of man the object of an art or of a
science? What would you say?
Student: It seems to me that in one sense it is the object of a science.
LS: Surely, in one sense. I don’t need more now, because this makes it clear that a deeper
understanding of law and even a deeper legislative art is bound to be more than a
practical science. It must go into the field of what is traditionally called metaphysics, but
we may use here the tentative and provisional term, a theoretical science. Therefore it is

20
legitimately a problem whether law as a mental act, if we use this somewhat funny
terminology, can be understood as an art or must be understood as a science. This subject
will come up in the sequel.
Now let us consider the context before we go on. Up to now we have seen that the
understanding of the law as mere customs or usages, i.e., of inanimate things, is
impossible. And Socrates suggested the analogy of sight, hearing, art, and science for the
understanding of what nomos is. The interlocutor has understood him up to that point.
How does Socrates go on from here? Let us read that.
Reader:
[Soc.:] Then what thing especially of this sort shall we surmise law to be?
[Com.:] Our resolutions and decrees, I imagine: for how else can one describe law? So
that apparently the whole thing, law, as you put it in your question, is a city’s resolution.
(314b-c)
LS: Let us stop here one moment. Now that is the second definition. He has forgotten
about the first, and says a law is a resolution, let us say, [a] resolution of the polis. Now
what about this definition? Well, what do they say today about law? We do not have to
go into the difference in a complicated federal state between federal, state, and municipal
laws.
Student: I’m not sure, but to the question you ask, I would say that they answer today
that it is an act of Congress.
LS: Yes, but ultimately an act of the political community, because the Congress has a
delegated power. So the law is the decision of the political community, we can say. Now
this is of course empirically always demonstrable, because even if you take an absolute
monarch as the lawgiver, he is the legislator of the political community. It is the most
obviously empirical definition. We will see later on that Socrates will leave this
definition, which is the second, and lead up to a third. And then we are through. This will
be criticized, and on very important grounds, but nevertheless it is the central definition,
which means that this definition has much in its favor. It is a very problematic definition,
but it has33 great empirical evidence, obviously. Now Socrates immediately [makes]34 a
change. You see, the interlocutor is not dumb. He sees immediately the difficulty of
saying the law35—or the legal provision, let me say—is the product of an art like the
shoemaker’s art or is the object of a science, because he knows how laws are made: by
nontechnical men in a nontechnical assembly, going together and deciding by vote. And
there is opinion involved, of course, but of any science or art it is at least dubious. As to
dogma, we must not forget that this is derived from the Greek word dokein, from which
doxa, opinion, is derived. Dogma is a word which you know, for example, from church
history. It means originally what has been decided by the citizen body. Socrates goes on
to say immediately, and here you see a very great step.
[Soc.:] It seems you call the law a political opinion.

21
[Com.:] I do indeed.xv (314c)
Now you see a very grave step. What is the difference between saying [that] law is a
political opinion and saying [that] law is a decision of the polis?
Student: Well, the step seems to be that you are making the decisions of the polis
opinion.
LS: In other words, the cognitive element is more clearly stated by calling it an opinion
than by calling it a decision. But there is another point which is equally important: a
political opinion.
Student: A political opinion isn’t binding on others, but a law is. I don’t see how . . .
LS: Surely that comes out, but even merely grammatically, first you have the decision of
the polis and now you have a political opinion. Who is now the opiner? In the first case
we know who is the decreer: the polis. But who is the opiner in the case of a political
opinion? The polis? I mean, if law is a political opinion, whose opinion? Decree of the
polis, whose decree? The polis’s, that is perfectly clear. But who opines here?
Student: The lawgivers or the lawmakers.
LS: But certainly not necessarily the polis. This is safe to say. If you say political
opinion, you describe as much the subject matter of the opinion—that on which you
opine—as [you do] the subject, the opiner. Now that is an absolutely crucial step. That
appears very irrational to Socrates. With what right is the polis entitled to make laws?
And we have first to look at the polis very closely and see whether it has a right to that.
This whole question is . . . I tell you how he will proceed. He will keep in mind this
suggestion regarding art and science, and he will lead up to the suggestion that the only
law which deserves to be called a law is made by an expert, by a man of knowledge or
art. And whether the polis is a body of men of knowledge or art is absolutely uncertain.
And with what right then can the polis make any assertions. That is what he is driving at.
But the first step he36 [takes] is that he omits the genitive,37 [“of the polis,” in] “an act of
the polis,” xvi and does not tell us but leaves it a question: Whose act is the law? It is not
necessarily an act of the polis, he claims, which to begin with is a wholly atrocious and
most subversive assertion, and we must see later on whether he has any reasons for
saying that.
The time is now up so I will only mention the next big step in the argument, and that is
this: The second definition, which is empirically the only decent definition you can give
of a law, is open to a very great difficulty. And here we remember our first example,
gold. People say not only that a law is the decision of the polis, they also say law is
something respectable—something noble, as the Greeks would say—something precious
xv

Strauss’s translation.
In other words (those of the Loeb translation), “political opinion” does away with the genitive
“of a city” in “resolution of a city.”
xvi

22
like gold. And Socrates says these two trivial, commonplace assertions regarding law
contradict each other. A decision of the polis is not as such respectable, and also a
respectable opinion is not as such the opinion of the polis. Therefore we have to make a
choice: Either we abandon the respectability of law, and then we can remain legal
positivists and say that law is the decision of the polis; or we stick to the respectability of
law, and then we have to abandon the empirical definition of law and have to go beyond
the empirical laws and find a rational criterion which allows us to distinguish between
respectable and despicable laws. And that is the next step; therefore Socrates is led to a
definition of law which, provisionally stated, is this: Law is knowledge. And then there is
a certain difficulty: Knowledge of what? Is it knowledge of the whole or is it knowledge
of certain things like the affairs of the polis? That will play a great role later on. But the
difficulty which makes it necessary to go beyond the legal positivistic view is the claim
raised by law that it is something which demands respect and is not merely meant to be
rammed down people’s throats. And thus the mere fact that a law is based on a decision
of the polis does not yet make it a law. This is the difficulty.
To indicate the structure of the argument, we have seen the first two definitions, the third
definition will be “law is knowledge,” with this ambiguity: Is it knowledge of the whole
or is it knowledge of a certain subject matter, say, the polis? And the third definition is
the last word of Socrates, and of course terrible difficulties arise. And Socrates has to
defend that definition. That is the second large part of the dialogue, of this very short
dialogue; and then after that, after Socrates has made it sure that this definition stands,
then the question arises: But where do we find that law which is knowledge? Surely not
in Athens. And what can a sensible man say? Well, only a god can have given such a law,
or, more specifically in this case, someone generated and trained by the highest god.
There is only one individual who meets this specification, and that is our old friend
Minos. Therefore, Minos’s law is the only law which can possibly demand our respect.
Another difficulty arises here because Minos had a very bad press in Athens, and
Socrates has to show that this was due to the folly of the Athenians and not to the alleged
injustice of Minos, and this is the end of the dialogue. Now after we are through with that
dialogue we will of course, as sensible people, buy immediately an airplane ticket for
Crete and look at the laws of Minos. And that is what in fact some Athenian, perhaps this
anonymous comrade, perhaps someone else, is doing in order to see that. And then we
must see of course whether these laws in Crete are so good, and that we will see in the
Laws.

1

Deleted “and.”
Deleted “it.” Moved “would be imaginable.”
3
Moved “therefore.”
4
Deleted “on.”
5
Deleted “Now.”
6
Deleted “The.”
7
Deleted “the.”
8
Deleted “in.”
9
Deleted “this is.”
2

23

10

Deleted “themselves.”
Deleted “in.”
12
Deleted “in.”
13
Deleted “what I said.”
14
Deleted “where.”
15
Moved “today.”
16
Deleted “whatever.”
17
Deleted “that.”
18
Moved “And that we can only answer after we have studied it.”
19
Changed from “Just as it were he meets him in the marketplace.”
20
Deleted “say.”
21
Deleted “of individuals.”
22
Deleted “now.”
23
Deleted “on.”
24
Deleted “it.”
25
Deleted “in.”
26
Changed from “And then we see immediately that if Socrates would have habitually done it and all the
time into what kind of troubles he would have come.”
27
Moved “later.”
28
Deleted “for.”
29
Deleted “compared with.”
30
Changed from “because logos as here the Greek word for speech means, for example, also proportion.”
31
Deleted “here.”
32
Moved “is.”
33
Deleted “a.”
34
Deleted “now.” Moved “immediately.”
35
Deleted “is.”
36
Deleted “does.”
37
Deleted “an.”
11

24
Session 2: January 8, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —a point which I made was not clear, as Mr. Dennis observed
quite rightly. When speaking of present-day social science, I said there are two premises
characteristic of it: (1) the distinction between facts and values, and (2) the reduction of
the political to the subpolitical, i.e., the sociological or the psychological. These are
undeniable facts. But I raised the question as to the connection between these two
principles, and this is where the trouble started. Now what I tried to say was this:1 the
fact–value distinction does not imply as such the necessity to reduce the political to the
nonpolitical. I didn’t say more than that. In other words, there might be specifically
political values which are irreducible to the nonpolitical, and 2 these political values might
be the starting point, the necessary starting point, for any analysis of the political. In other
words, I never thought of denying that there are nonpolitical values. This I think should
not be agreeable. Then I gave some reasons why there is a possible problem in the
present-day notions of the social sciences, and therefore an incentive to study Plato
and/or Aristotle. And for certain reasons we plan to discuss in this semester Plato’s Laws,
which is Plato’s political work par excellence.
The Laws confronts us immediately with a difficulty because it is the only Platonic
dialogue in which Socrates does not appear, not even as a silent listener. This can be
explained provisionally by the fact that the conversation on law takes place on the island
of Crete. But this is of course not a sufficient answer, because then the question arises
immediately: Why was the conversation located by Plato on Crete and not in Athens?
And we get an answer to this question in the short dialogue Minos, which we are
discussing before we turn to the Laws. Now this dialogue, Minos, which is today
generally regarded as spurious, that is to say, as not written by Plato—but surely by a
man familiar with Plato, with Plato’s work, with Plato’s thought, a man who more than
any man today knew about Plato—is still very valuable to us from every point of view.
Now the difficulty in this dialogue is that it begins very abruptly and in a quite unusual
way, with Socrates buttonholing a nameless acquaintance, comrade, with the question
“What is law?”i To solve this difficulty I suggested that we consider the only other
Platonic dialogue which begins in the same way and which has the same character,
namely, a discussion between Socrates and a nameless comrade beginning abruptly with
Socrates addressing this fellow with the question “What is?”ii And this other dialogue is
the Hipparchus. Now these two dialogues, the Hipparchus and the Minos, have
something very important in common apart from these external things, namely, the
Hipparchus leads up to the praise of an Athenian tyrant, [while] the Minos leads up to the
praise of a non-Athenian lawgiver. In both cases Athenian law is the victim, so to speak.
Now there is however this difference, which I mention in passing: that the praise of the
tyrant in the Hipparchus occurs in the middle of the dialogue, whereas in the Minos the
praise of the foreign lawgiver occurs at the end, so that the praise of Minos is more
visible at the first glance than the praise of the tyrant in the Hipparchus.
i
ii

Minos 313a.
Hipparchus 225a.

25
This much as an introduction. I remind you now only briefly of the points which we
discussed last time. There is a first definition of law given, according to which law is the
usages: law is many, and the usages are something lifeless, inanimate. We have discussed
that. Socrates induces the interlocutor—by one question, really—to admit that law is not
in any way a product of mental acts but a mental act itself, something like a sense
perception or reason. But more specifically, since it is not sense perception, it must be an
act of reason. And here the question arises right away: Is it a science or is it an art? (An
art in the Greek sense of the word and not fine art.) This suggestion of Socrates leads to
the second definition of law in the dialogue according to which it is a decree of the city
or, as Socrates says, a political opinion, because opinions are of course also acts of
reason. I think we had reached this point, and we should now continue in the Loeb edition
at page 392.
Reader:
[Soc.:] A state opinion (or a political opinion), iii it seems, is what you call law.
[Com.:] I do.
[Soc.:] And perhaps you are right: but I fancy we shall get a better knowledge in this
way. You call some men wise?
[Com.:] I do.
[Soc.:] And the wise are wise by wisdom?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And again, the just are just by justice?
[Com.:] Certainly.
[Soc.:] And so the law-abiding are law-abiding by law?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And the lawless are lawless by lawlessness?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And the law-abiding are just?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And the lawless are unjust?
[Com.:] Unjust. (314c-d)
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. Now what do we see here? This is leading up to
something, but we must not forget where the starting point is. The starting point is the
provisional suggestion, i.e., Socrates says: “Perhaps you speak right” or, to be a bit more
precise, “Perhaps you speak finely or nobly”iv (which is not exactly the same as truly, but
these subtleties we can leave for a moment). But now in order to find out whether it is
truly right, Socrates raises this simple question: What do we learn from the text read to
this point?
Student: Wisdom drops out, doesn’t it?

iii

In the Loeb: “state opinion” (“or a political opinion” must have been the reader’s insertion, in
line with Strauss’s previous remarks on the translation).
iv
Minos 314d.

26
LS: This is true, but too general. Law is apparently identical with justice, as you see,
because the lawful are just; the lawless are unjust. Men are made lawful by law and they
are made just by justice, and it follows that law and justice are identical. But justice and
wisdom are not identical; that is also implied. We must keep this in mind. Now how does
he go on?
Reader:
[Soc.:] And justice and law are most noble?
[Com.:] That is so.
[Soc.:] And injustice and lawlessness most base?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And the former preserve cities and everything else, while the latter destroy and
overturn them?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] Hence we must regard law as something noble, and seek after it as a good.
[Com.:] Undeniably. (314d)
LS: You see, [we must regard law] as something noble and we must seek it as a good. It
is something noble because it is most noble, as he says, and3 good because it preserves
the city and everything else. This distinction between the good and noble is not so
familiar to us today, and therefore it must be briefly explained. What we call morality is
called by the Greeks (they do not have a single word for that) the noble things and the
just things; they together constitute what we call morality. You can of course also say the
noble things are just things, the just things are noble—that is clear—but primarily they
are distinguished. The just we can compare to what we call matters of duty, and the noble
are things which are in a way above and beyond duty, which deserve particular praise. A
simple example: to pay one’s debts is just, but clearly not noble—I mean, it is too little
for that. Other things are noble and yet one would not call them just, because they are not
required by justice. Now the good as good does not in itself have a moral meaning. For
example, you speak also of what is good for the body, good for a horse, and good for a
dog, and also good for men. The question which is answered in the affirmative by
Socrates (but not by all Greeks, of course) is that the good for men comprises the moral,
the noble and the just, but4 [they are] not simply identical; the point of view is different.
Good does not in itself have this moral meaning. Now here we see the distinction clearly.
Justice is something noble, i.e., something to be praised, respected, highly regarded. And
on the other hand, it is something good because it preserves the city. Good has also the
utilitarian implication which is completely absent from the noble and the just. But [as to]
the point which we get from the discussion here, one thing is understood: whatever law
may mean, it must be something good and noble. It must be something good and noble
because that is what we mean by law. And if a definition does not bring out this point, it
is an inadequate definition. Continue.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And we said that law is a city’s resolution?
[Com.:] So we did.
[Soc.:] Well now, are not some resolutions good, and others evil?

27
[Com.:] Yes, to be sure. (314d-e)
LS: I see one can hardly translate this differently, although the words used are not the
simple words for good and evil. [The one, chrēston] means something like useful, and it
can also take on easily a moral meaning—honest, respectable and so on. And the other
[ponēros] means primarily something toilsome, and therefore bad. Let us leave it at this
somewhat simplistic translation: good and bad.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And, you know, law was not evil.
[Com.:] No, indeed.
[Soc.:] So it is not right to reply, in such downright fasion, that law is a city’s resolution.
[Com.:] I agree that it is not.
[Soc.:] An evil resolution, you see, cannot properly be a law.
[Com.:] No, to be sure. (314e)
LS: Do you understand this simple argument? The definition was: Law is the decree of
the city. How has this definition been refuted by one simple consideration?
Student: The decree of the city is not always good.
LS: Yes. And law must be good. That is what he is saying. Taking an entirely impartial
view of the situation, could one not also take the other line, namely, that we have here
two incompatible definitions, i.e., (1) law, the decree of the city, (2) law, good? Now
these are incompatible because the decree of the city is as such not good. And on the
other hand, a good—say, a good order—does not as such have to do with the good order
of a city. What Socrates suggests is that we delete that [LS writes on the blackboard] but
we could as well do this [LS writes on the blackboard] and stick to our positivistic
definition, i.e.,5 say that we do not care about good or bad but only concern ourselves
with what is the decree of the city. That happens everywhere in the Platonic dialogues.
We come up against a contradiction, in other words, a case where “a is b,” and “a is
different from b,” are equally evident. But they cannot be equally evident, and what do
you do? You have to drop one of them. Now as a rule Socrates never gives a reason why
he drops the proposition which he drops; that we have to find out for ourselves. And we
have to see whether Socrates maybe made the wrong choice: perhaps he should have
dropped the other thing. These are the things which are not said, the conversation
proceeds much too fast for that. We have much more time. That is the good quality of
books, as you know, as distinguished from speeches: you can always read again, but you
cannot hear again. Even this kind of thing [LS refers to the tape recorder] is no help for
that, although for other reasons. You cannot hear again the speech, but you can read again
and again a book.
Now Socrates just picks that—law is good and noble—and the important point is this:
Socrates has his reasons. These are difficult to fathom because Socrates was a profound
man. But the interlocutor, who is a more simple man, why did he choose it? Why does he
admit it without any difficulty? Some of you would have acted like him; others would

28
have said “No!” They would have asked why should he do that; [they would have said]
that it was simply a popular prejudice.
Student: Well, the interlocutor possibly knows of some bad laws of the city, laws that he
doesn’t agree with. And therefore he would prefer the other definition.
LS: I see. He is in this sense a citizen. But we must see how far this is correct.
Student: Isn’t the reason that he has admitted it, because he had earlier agreed to the
definition of law in terms of goodness, in terms of justice and goodness as associated
[with one another]? To be consistent . . .
LS: You are quite right. In other words, he had admitted explicitly the principle that law
is something respectable, noble and good. And then he could not well drop it now. That is
true. Now let us see how we go on from here.
Reader:
[Soc.:] But still, I am quite clear myself that law is some sort of opinion; and since it is
not evil opinion, is it not manifest by this time that it is good opinion, granting that law is
opinion?
[Com.:] Yes. (314e)
LS: Now for those who can follow the Greek, I mention that here in this sentence kata as
a part of a word occurs: kata, downward. It is a kind of downward look. These are the
things which Plato frequently uses in order to indicate the character of the subject matter.
Law is not a very high subject, as it will appear later. But this only in passing.
Reader:
[Soc.:] But what is good opinion? Is it not true opinion?
[Com.:] Yes. (314e-15a)
LS: This is of course a very great step. An opinion could be good, meaning valuable,
without being a true opinion. That is by no means evident. But in a way Socrates is of
course precise and says [that] opinion as opinion, as [a] purely cognitive thing, is
primarily concerned with truth or untruth. Continue.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And true opinion is discovery of reality? (315a)
LS: “Reality” is of course impossible; “of being,” of what is.
Reader:
[Com.:] Yes it is. (315a)
LS: Now let us stop here for one moment. You remember the passage where he made a
distinction between science and law (page 390, 314a to b). And the term which he uses

29
now here,6 exeuresis tou ontos, finding out of what is, really combines the two characters
of science and art. So the question is here completely undecided: science or art? Let us
keep this in mind. At any rate, let us read the next Socratic remark, and then we are
through with the third and last definition of law.
Reader:
[Soc.:] So law tends to be discovery of reality. (315a)
LS: “Wishes to be,” more literally translated. Law wishes to be discovery of being. That
is the final definition of law given here. The rest is a defense of that definition. You see
that Socrates changes here the apparent result of this discussion. Did you notice that?
What does he do? Compare the two sentences and you have it.
Student: Here he says law wishes to be, and before he had said law is.
LS: Yes. So you see, Socrates, without giving any reason, takes a precautionary measure.
Because if it were simply said that law is true opinion of being, it would be manifestly
absurd, and therefore he says it wishes to be. If you look at any given law, Socrates says,
it is not necessarily true opinion but it wishes to be. Law as law is necessarily to be
judged in terms of goodness or badness, in terms of its end. A law cannot be understood
except in terms of its end. Since it cannot be understood except in terms of its end, it
must be judged in terms of goodness or badness. A neutral treatment of law is altogether
impossible.
Student: When he used the word “discovery” here, you suggested that he preserved the
ambiguity between science and art, but didn’t he use that word earlier precisely to
describe art?
LS: Yes, but in the first place there is a little change. He spoke of euresis, if I may use
the Greek term, and here he speaks of exeuresis, which is a slight change. I could not
explain it, but it indicates a change. And secondly, when he spoke of the arts he used the
Greek term pragma, which corresponds to the Latin word res. Now here he speaks of on,
which he used formerly when he spoke of science. It is clear that the distinction between
science and art is completely blurred here, and of course deliberately, because we don’t
know that yet. But let us think for one moment about this fantastic assertion, i.e., the law
wishes to be discovery of being. What does it mean in plain English? What is law? How
do we call that pursuit which tries to discover being as being?
Student: Metaphysics.
LS: That is not a Platonic word. How would you call it?
Student: Philosophy.
LS: In other words, Socrates says, without saying so, [that] law is philosophy. Now what
one has to do in such cases, after having been dumbfounded for a moment and perhaps

30
even for more than a moment, is to recover one’s balance or poise and see whether it
makes sense to say that law is philosophy. We must do this independently, because we
should be better men than this nameless comrade and therefore understand better. Also,
we have the unfair advantage that we can read this time and again, whereas this poor
fellow couldn’t do that. Now does it make sense to say that law is philosophy? We must
understand that.
Student: In the first sense, you can say law is philosophy, at least in the sense that it rises
out of a philosophy or a way of looking at—
LS: But simply starting from what we all admit in every day life regarding law.
Student: I wonder just how crucial the analytic elements of philosophy are to this
conclusion. Does the word philosophy as Socrates is using it imply wisdom? If it does, it
denies what he has already said when he left out wisdom and when he was referring to
law and justice: law as being just but not wise. Now if it is true that philosophy does
mean the love of wisdom, then we have an obvious contradiction.
LS: Yes, that is very good that you remind us of that. We must keep this in mind. But
before we try to solve it, let us try to understand this alternative according to which law
would be pursuit of wisdom, seeking for wisdom, love of wisdom. And let us see whether
that makes sense. Now could one not say, following what we have heard, that the law
wishes to be beneficial to human beings? Could not one say that? Quite a few people, I
think, would say this. Certainly it wishes to be; unfortunately it is sometimes damaging,
but it wishes to be beneficial to human beings. All right, what must we know to judge
properly of laws, and perhaps even to give good laws? What would one have to know if
we wish to give rules that will be beneficial to human beings?
Student: You have to know what is beneficial to human beings, and to know that you
have to know something about human beings.
LS: You have to know the nature of man and what is good for him. But perhaps one
cannot know what is beneficial to man, what is good for man, what is the nature of man,
without knowing the whole. Now if that should be so, then it would be obvious that law
is philosophy. Yes, this is very much shorthand, as you see, but these are not empty
considerations. They come up all the time. To what extent is it really possible to form a
proper judgment of political things, of broad issues, without raising all questions, the
most fundamental and most comprehensive questions? Surely. [. . .]v But common sense
in you, Mr. Dennis, rebels against that and gets some support by Socrates’s distinction
between wisdom and justice. And we will see that goes through the whole dialogue. Is an
independent wisdom regarding political matters possible, or is it essentially dependent on
wisdom proper, i.e., universal knowledge? That is the question. That is indicated by the
difference between science and art which was made in 314.
v The context suggests that there might have been a brief inaudible exchange between

Strauss and Mr. Dennis here.

31

Do we now understand the three steps taken? The first: law is usages. This is dropped
immediately as inadequate, because we can say it is simply a mere tautology. Law is of
course the totality of the usages, if you remember for one moment that law is not
necessarily written law made by a formal legislator. That is only our modern view. It
could very well be mere custom. To that extent it is a tautology. The only interesting
definitions are the second [and the third. The second]: law is the decree of the political
society, which is a commonsense view and in its way undeniable but misleading because
it blinds us to the problem of the law, namely, to the necessary distinction between good
and bad laws. Now if we realize the necessity of distinguishing between good and bad
laws, we transcend law, mere law, in the direction of philosophy already. And the most
massive statement of this second view is the third definition: law is philosophy. You can
say the second definition is too low and too narrow. The third definition is too big.
Somewhere in between probably is the truth. But it is good to start from these extremes in
order to get greater clarity about the more precise intermediate point. In this dialogue we
do not get explicitly beyond this definition, because what follows now is merely a
defense of this definition. Now what would you say is the most simple objection to that
proposition, law is philosophy?
Student: I think the simplest is that it doesn’t help you very much.
LS: But still one can also say this objection is not very helpful, that it is very unspecific.
Now if someone would say “Law is philosophy,” what would you think?
Student: Lawyers are not philosophers.
LS: Sure. Look at the fellows who make laws and interpret laws. That is one thing. But
what would Socrates say against that objection? He has taken care of that.
Student: They desire to be.
LS: I see. Yes, that comes up. Now let us see what our comrade is going to say, because
he objects immediately. At this point the second part of the dialogue the central part
begins, namely, the defense of the definition, of the final definition. Now what does he
say?
Reader:
[Com.:] Then how is it, Socrates, if law is discovery of reality, that we do not use always
the same laws on the same matters, if we have thus got realities discovered.vi (315a)
LS: Wait. Is it not a strange sentence? Two conditional clauses—“if the law is discovery
of being,” and “if the beings have been discovered.” That is not very logical as it is
stated, but on a moment’s reflection it appears very sensible. Because if law is discovery
of being (well, of course, he changes it and drops the “wishes to be”) and in addition, the
beings (you see, he turns to the plural again—this one/many is a great problem) are
vi

In the Loeb: “got realities discovered.”

32
discovered, there should always be the same laws about the same things. Does it make
sense? Because if we know the truth about a subject, then we say always the same thing
about that same subject. But our laws are in a state of change; hence this is a paradoxical
and implausible proposition of Socrates.
Student: But the fact remains that Socrates has said the law “wishes to be,” and the
interlocutor has changed this again to “the law is,” so [to accord with] Socrates’s
statement, [the interlocutor should have said] “if the law wishes to be the discovery of
that which is.”
LS: Surely, you can say he changes the definition. He doesn’t say law wishes to be but
says law is, in effect, discovery. Let us then see Socrates’s answer and whether this is of
any help.
Reader:
[Soc.:] Law tends none the less to be discovery of reality: but men, who do not use
always the same laws, as we observe, are not always able to discover what the law is
intent on—reality.vii (315a)
LS: 7“being.”
Reader: “is intent on—being.”
LS: Let us stop at that. He says: You have misunderstood me; I didn’t say law is a
discovery of being, but law tends to be a discovery of being. But what about a given law,
say, in Athens, which is changed now? There is one attempt at discovery and this is
replaced by another attempt at discovery. Does this make sense? Just as in science one
hypothesis which proves to be very fruitful is replaced on consideration by another
hypothesis. What is the difficulty here, if we apply that to law?
Student: Well, the one that immediately suggests itself to me is that law is not even an
attempt to discover reality. It is an attempt to produce order or regulation, or even, in the
extreme, education.
LS: But the question is whether that is not in a way—whether one could not dispose of
this difficulty as follows, by saying: Well, law is an attempt to discover the truth, or what
is, regarding, say, human things. What is beneficial to the American people in 1959 is the
discovery of one aspect or part, however you call it, of so-called reality.
Student: Well, to stick to the empirical commonsense approach, it would seem that this
is putting the cart before the horse. It would seem that the laws, the decrees of the city,
are passed out of something already discovered or thought to have been discovered
correctly, namely, what is the good of the city in 1959 and not vise versa.
LS: I do not quite follow you.
vii

In the Loeb: “is intent on—reality.”

33

Student: Well, if law is an attempt to discover reality, then this law “A” is an attempt,
and we will see if it works out and does in fact discover reality—
LS: But could one not say also this: that if law is essentially an attempt, law is never a
success? And therefore no law which was ever established anywhere really does what
law wishes to do; therefore all laws are imperfect. Is this not implied, if it is essentially a
wish for something, an attempt and not the fulfillment? Socrates, I believe, tries to avoid
this by making here this distinction between law and human beings, which in its
suggestive character—which does not quite jibe with what is explicitly said—would
mean this: the law is the truth, but the human beings do not always know the truth. Those
of you who remember the Crito will remember that in a crucial passage there, this
substitution of the human beings for the law saves the credit of the law in this very
difficulty argument. You know Socrates was condemned to death. A terrible injustice has
been committed. But Socrates says: No, you can’t blame the law for that, you have to
blame the human beings who apply the law. And so the authority of the law is saved.
Something similar is going on here. But that is of course not sufficient. It is only an
attempt to restore the distinction between discovery of being and an attempt or a wish to
discover being.
Student: Is that what he means when he says that law even understood in this higher
sense is opinion?
LS: You mean because he had said law is true opinion?
Student: But before he says it is true opinion, he says it is opinion.
LS: Yes, but the final word on that subject is that it is true opinion. 8 A true opinion is an
opinion which opines being as it is. It is not knowledge for certain other reasons, but in
this respect it is final insofar as, to repeat, it opines being as it is. But in the meantime, we
have had this qualification: the law is not necessarily true opinion; it tends to be or wishes
to be true opinion.
Student: I just wondered why he found it necessary to take this step, in that I think it is
an opinion too. Why couldn’t he simply have let it go at that?
LS: Apparently the assertion that law is true opinion is opposed to grave difficulties, and
therefore Socrates says it wishes or tends to be true opinion. Now what is the difficulty if
you say the law is true opinion? Well, it really would mean that all laws are good. While
the opinion that law is indifferent to the distinction between good and bad, as the second
definition implied, is inadequate, the other definition, which would say all laws are good,
also goes too far, and thus it is brought out that law tends to be. Law must always be seen
in the light of its end and its possible goodness, that is true, but it does not always live up
to that. That is as important for the understanding of law as the realization that law is
subject to a standard. At any rate, the objection of the comrade was this: If the law is
discovery of being, laws must be unchangeable. That is obviously stated. The

34
changeability of laws, in other words, the manyness of laws, is the objection to the
identification of law with truth. That is his difficulty.
Student: Why is discovery of being called opinion? Granted true opinion, but why
opinion?
LS: Well, as to opinion, that is developed in the Theaetetus. Now what is opinion,
according to Plato? The result of some reasoning. Of course it may be false and untrue,
but it is not merely sense perception or memory; there is some reasoning. The opinion
may agree with what is, and then it is true; it may disagree, and then it is false. But why is
even true opinion not enough? Because as true opinion it may not be accompanied, it
need not be accompanied, by clarity about the true reason. Let us take a very ordinary
example. You have an opinion about a certain man. This opinion may be true opinion, but
if you are asked why you think he is, say, unreliable, you may reply that you have a
hunch. That is true opinion, but it is not more than opinion because you cannot prove it.
Therefore the final definition suggested in the Theaetetus is that science or knowledge is
true opinion accompanied by an account of itself. This is dropped here, and some people
say that proves that Plato didn’t write it—as if Plato were always compelled to develop
an argument fully, as if it were not sufficient in a certain conversational context to leave
it at a very provisional statement like that here.
Student: Could a mere hunch be described as a discovery of what is?
LS: But is it not so? You have seen something, noticed something, and this let you see
that, and that [it] is this. But in the moment you try to convince someone else, to
transform your impression into something teachable—knowledge is teachable—then you
see you don’t possess knowledge. You cannot reproduce the same hunch coming from
the same situation at will.
Student: I wonder if it is implied that as far as acts are concerned the distinction between
knowledge and opinion is irrelevant.
LS: You mean as far as actions?
Student: Yes, actions.
LS: Why should it? That may not be knowledge in the precise sense of the term, sense
perception, that is, but when you act you have a major premise or maxim and then you
subsume the present case, e.g., “I need money,” [under it]. In a technical sense you can
say that this “I need money” is not knowledge, not science. Surely not. But it is of course
very certain; there is no doubt about it, [as] some of you will know. And therefore this
syllogism: Whoever needs money should go to a bank and not take it from someone on a
dark night on the Midway;viii but I am in need of money; hence I should rather go to the
bank, is a wonderfully certain syllogism, knowledge as good as any. The subtle
viii

A park near the University of Chicago campus.

35
differences between that and a purely mathematically proposition, syllogism, doesn’t
concern us here.
Student: What I had in mind is more like this. Say a man kills another, and you knew he
did it and I only opined he did it.
LS: Don’t you read detective stories and such things which show there are rules of
evidence? They are of course highly conventional, but with sound reason. They are
designed to protect from error. The man who has seen the act of killing, and has seen
clearly the face of the killer, without any question knows that he is a murderer by this
sense perception. Whether he can be believed—because he may hate that other fellow,
and therefore rules of evidence come in—that is an entirely different question. But there
are ways in which this can be transmitted, and it is only because of the moral question—
Can he be believed because he may have hated the man?—that9 the rules of evidence
[are] so important. If you say this: Strictly speaking, I can never know what another man
has perceived and if it is true. But you know that we have indirect ways of checking on
that. For example, if you had never traveled around the earth, you might legitimately
doubt whether the earth can be circumnavigated. But we have ways of finding out
whether that is really so. We are not entirely dependent on the reports of such travelers.
But the point, if I understand you correctly, is this: what I have perceived and no one else
has perceived is not strictly speaking communicable. It is communicable as a fact, but it
can never be demonstrated.
Student: If one of us only opined [and] the other knew that a man was a murderer, our
actions as a result of that would be the same. Both you and I would say that man should
be hanged. So that our actions would be the same whether . . .
LS: But then this difficulty arises. Since the law must take into consideration all kinds of
things, e.g., [concerning] people who are credible and people who are not credible, 10 [the
question is] whether someone should be hanged on the evidence of a single witness, and
whether there is not needed in addition a lot of circumstantial evidence, for example, that
he has expressed the urgent wish to kill that fellow to other people, and so on.
But let us return to the main point in this discussion, i.e., that changeability of laws means
manyness of laws, and that manyness of laws is the objection to the final definition.
Student: Maybe I am reading too much into this, but it seems to me that Plato has tacitly
assumed an axiom that there can only be one method for discovering one thing, instead of
perhaps that many methods could discover the same thing. He seems to assume that only
one law can discover one reality, that there is one law for each reality. It seems to me that
one could equally argue that many laws could discover the same reality. At least he
hasn’t taken up this argument.
LS: I do not see that this is so. What he clearly says, or at least what the comrade says, is
this: regarding the same subject matter, and the same point of view of course, there can
only be one truth. That is all he says. Now if11 [the] subject matter12 is, [say], theft, then it

36
is here implied—and we will later on see that Plato knew the difficulty—that there can be
only one truth regarding theft, i.e., there can be only one true law anywhere and at any
time regarding theft. This can very well be questioned.
Student: Well, maybe I had misunderstood what he means by discovery. I thought by
discovery he would mean a method for arriving at truth rather than truth itself.
LS: No, discovery means really discovery. The method is a method toward discovery, it
is not itself the discovery. If the being is discovered, you are at the end of the method.
The method would be the way towards [it]. Therefore, I think the difference of methods
wouldn’t come in. The real difficulty is of course this very grave premise that there can
be only one sound law at any time, anywhere, regarding the same subject matter—say,
theft of sheep, to make it more specific—whereas common sense would tell us it depends
very much on circumstances. And we must see later on whether Socrates is not aware of
that. Now the next sentence [of Socrates] is of certain difficulty 13. Page 396.
Reader:
[Soc.:] For come now, let us see if from this point onward we can get it clear whether we
use always the same laws or different ones at different times, and whether we all use the
same, or some of us use some, and others others. (315b)
LS: That is difficult to understand. What happens now is this, that the comrade proves to
Socrates the14 variety and manyness of laws, and he seems merely to do what Socrates
asks him to do. And then Socrates, in the speech immediately following (at the bottom of
this page), is dissatisfied with this proof as something completely superfluous. Hence this
speech cannot mean15 [what] it is usually understood [to mean], the key word being the
Greek word enthende in the third line,ix which I would understand here as “from this
point of view.” And what Socrates means, I believe, is this: let us see whether we cannot
understand the fact of manyness of law and of change of law on the basis of the
distinction between the law and human beings. If this distinction must be made between
law and16 human beings, then it follows necessarily that there will be manyness of laws.
But that is not the way in which the interlocutor understands it. You see, what happens
very frequently in translations is this. The translator takes the understanding by the
interlocutor as the way in which the question of Socrates must be understood. But that is
by no means necessary; the interlocutor may have misunderstood Socrates. And we must
see from what Socrates says, and also [from] what he later on does, how this utterance of
Socrates has to be interpreted. That is an example of this. At any rate, however this may
be, the interlocutor has the impression that Socrates doesn’t even know whether there are
many laws, or whether laws are changed. Therefore, out of the fullness of his wisdom of
practical information, he tells Socrates. Now let us see what he proves. That is a very
interesting passage which comes now.
Reader:
[Com.:] Why that, Socrates, is no difficult matter to determine— (315b)
ix

Minos 315b3.

37
LS: You see, when he says here “Socrates,” it does not have the meaning that he is
troubled by Socrates but rather as one would say to a rather stupid individual: “But, Mr.
Miller, don’t you know that?” He tries to awaken Socrates to a sense of reality. Continue.
Reader:
that the same men do not use always the same laws, and also that different men use
different ones. With us, for instance, human sacrifice is not legal, but unholy, whereas the
Carthaginians perform it as a thing they account holy and legal, and that too when some
of them sacrifice even their own sons to Cronos, as I daresay you yourself have heard.
(315b-c)
LS: “As perhaps even you have heard”—you know, Socrates, this complete lamb, babe
in the woods. Now continue.
Reader:
And not merely is it foreign peoples who use different laws from ours— (315c)
LS: “Barbarian human beings.” Now continue.
Reader:
but our neighbors in Lycaea and the descendants of Athamas—you know their sacrifices,
Greeks though they be. And as to ourselves too, you know, of course, from what you
have heard yourself, the kind of laws we formerly used in regard to our dead, when we
slaughtered sacred victims before the funeral procession, and engaged urn-women to
collect the bones from the ashes. Then again, a yet earlier generation used to bury the
dead where they were, in the house: but we do none of these things. One might give
thousands of other instances; for there is ample means of proving that neither we copy
ourselves nor mankind each other always in laws and customs. (315c-d)
LS: “We do not fix the same with ourselves in the same respect regarding the same
things.” We17 agree, we could say, neither with ourselves nor with others always
regarding the same things. Now let us consider for one moment these examples. The
examples refer to two grave subjects. Which are they?
Student: Human sacrifice and funerals.
LS: The most important themes for men in former times and even today. I hope you see
from here why law is really philosophy. If you want to find out the truth about human
sacrifice and about funerals, what do you have to know? Which questions must you have
answered before you can settle these questions?
Student: The character of the gods.
LS: Number one. Number two?
Student: Immortality.

38

LS: Of the soul, surely. These examples are very wisely chosen, and one sees
immediately how inseparable is law. I mean, if you speak about a very simple law
regarding right or left driving, you do not have to move [to] metaphysics, but not all laws
are of that nature. And look at them in detail—you see the simplest example is the second
one. He speaks here first of the old Athenian practice, then he speaks of the still older
Athenian practice, and then of the present Athenian practice. Now these are changes
within Athenian law only. Which is the best of these three in the opinion of our friend?
What would you say? What is your impression?
Student: The ones now.
LS: I believe so. I believe the proof however comes . . . I think he is simply shocked by
this thought that the dead are buried in the house in the very old times, and also the kind
of things they did formerly after these old rites were abolished. But let us turn to the
human sacrifices, the sacrifices to Cronos, to Saturnus. He gives there four specimens:
the Athenians, no human sacrifices; the Carthaginians, sacrifices of one’s own sons; and
then [two] other human sacrifices, but apparently not of the sons, brought by the Greeks
[i.e., “our neighbors in Lycaea and the descendants of Athamas”]. In each case, [i.e., in
the case of sacrifice and in the case of burial] the most horrible is in the middle, as you
see: sacrificing of one’s own sons and burying the dead in one’s house. One can say,
applying to this short passage a description usually applied to Thucydides (to the first part
of Thucydides’s history), “that is archaeology, a description of the olden time.” This
young man is an “enlightened” young man (I put the quotes around enlightened because
we do not know yet whether we can say more about him) and the ordinary view is of
course a high regard for antiquity in olden times. And now we see that there are some
Greeks even now who behave like barbarians. That reminds also of a thesis of
Thucydides that18 [originally] all Greeks were also barbarians. The distinctiveness of the
Greeks is a fairly recent event, according to him. The same is implied here. There are
altogether seven examples, as you can easily see. The central one is that of the
descendants of Athamas. I do not know why this is brought into the center; one would
have to do some studies which I haven’t done. The main point for our purposes, however,
is to see that the examples chosen show the inseparable connection of law and
philosophy. These questions,19 the question of funerals as well as [that of] sacrifices,
[cannot be rationally settled] without philosophy. That is what Socrates is driving at.
Now what does Socrates say after having received this most important information which
he is supposed never to have heard?x
Reader:
[Soc.:] And it is no wonder, my excellent friend, if what you say is correct, and I have
overlooked it. But if you continue to express your views after your own fashion in
lengthy speeches, and I speak likewise, we shall never come to any agreement, in my
opinion: but if we study the matter jointly, we may perhaps concur. Well now, if you like,
hold a joint inquiry with me by asking me questions; or if you prefer, by answering them.
x

The tape was changed at this point. The transcript resumes with Socrates’s “by asking me
questions; or if you prefer.” The missing text is supplemented from the Loeb translation.

39
[Com.:] Why, I am willing, Socrates, to answer anything you like. (315d-e)
LS: That also throws some light on the situation. Socrates had been given some
information which, in the opinion of this comrade, Socrates needed because he was so
ignorant of20 [it]. And now Socrates makes a very impertinent remark about long
speeches. It was not a very long speech. Socrates himself frequently makes much longer
speeches in this very dialogue. Now these remarks occur also in other dialogues, i.e.,
where Socrates complains about long speeches, and very unfairly, as you see. What about
long or short speeches? We must at least mention this question. Now what is the right
form, long speeches or short speeches?
Student: It depends upon the subject matter.
LS: Yes. The appropriate length. That is what Prodicusxi said and Socrates fully agrees
with him. So when he opposes long speeches, that is only a polite way of opposing
irrelevant long speeches, not long speeches altogether. But there is of course some
element of truth in it. If one makes a speech and then the other makes a speech, they will
never meet, they need not ever meet. Therefore, from this point of view, there must at
least be an end to that speech; otherwise there can never be a possibility of mutual
conviction. And then Socrates leaves21 [it] open and says: You can raise a question and
you can answer. The words which he uses here in Greek (page 398) pynthanomenos ti
par’ emou koinē, which are translated here “hold a joint inquiry with me,” xii22 may also
mean [together with the rest of the sentence, met’ emou skopei]: “if you wish, try to
inquire from me and then look at the thing together with me.” In other words, he had
given information to Socrates, and now Socrates says: Perhaps you [want to] try to get
information from me; and therefore23 ask questions, then I will give you the information.
But if you prefer, you may also give the answer. He chooses to answer. Now what does
this mean in the context? That he is sure that he is the man to give information, not that
babe in the woods, Socrates—who, as he believes, didn’t know these facts. And he has
indeed the nerve to say: But I am willing, Socrates, to answer whatever you say, which
means, of course: I will have an answer to every question you can raise. This gives us a
notion of this man.
Now where do we stand regarding the main argument? There can be no question that
laws are many and varied. And yet laws are said to be true, and the truth can only be one
regarding a given subject. Socrates must defend, then, his definition of law. How does he
proceed? Let us see.
Reader:
[Soc.:] Come then, do you consider just things to be unjust and unjust things just, or just
things to be just and unjust things unjust?
[Com.:] I consider just things to be just and unjust things unjust. (315e-316a)
xi

Prodicus of Ceos (c. 465 BCE–c. 395 BCE), a famous rhetorician and first generation sophist.
In the Phaedrus Socrates reports that Prodicus had said that he had discovered the art of proper
speech, that speeches ought to be neither long nor short, but of measured length (267b).
xii
Minos 315e.

40

LS: I cannot, of course, bring out all these little beauties. But here in this case, I, “I
regard the just things just and the unjust [things] unjust.” In other words, there may be
people who do or don’t do that. Continue.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And are they so considered among all men elsewhere as they are here?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And among the Persians also?
[Com.:] Among the Persians also.
[Soc.:] Always, I presume?
[Com.:] Always.
[Soc.:] Are things that weigh more considered heavier here, and things that weigh less
lighter, or the contrary?
[Com.:] No, those that weigh more are considered heavier, and those that weigh less
lighter.
[Soc.:] And is it so in Carthage also, and in Lycaea?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] Noble things, it would seem, are everywhere considered noble, and base things
base; not base things noble or noble things base.
[Com.:] That is so.
[Soc.:] And thus, as a universal rule, realities, and not unrealities, are accepted as real,
both among us and among all other men.
[Com.:] I agree.
[Soc.:] Then whoever fails to attain reality, fails to attain accepted law. (316a-b)
LS: Yes, that is his first argument, and we must consider that. Now the translation
doesn’t bring out clearly enough what the nerve of the argument is. Everywhere people
admit that being is—or beings are, and nonbeings are not. That they believe everywhere.
[In Greek] to believe means 24 [or] can be best expressed by the word nomizein: they hold
it, they believe it. It is a derivative from the word nomos. And hence he25 [who] would
say [that] being is not does not agree with what is generally or universally held. That is to
say he misses what is universally admitted to be true, 26 the universal nomos. He who
misses being misses the legal. That is the end of this argument. What 27 [would] you say
to that?
Student: Well, it is rather hard to deny [that] being is, because it is the use of the word is
and is in fact an extension of it. Grammatically it is the same thing.
LS: What is the relevance of the argument for the grave question which we have, that the
manyness and variety of laws endangers the truth of law? That shouldn’t surprise you,
because the most common argument against, for example, natural law is that [there is a]
variety of opinions as to what constitutes justice. And the conclusion very commonly
drawn is that there is no truth about justice because people have the most varied opinions
about justice, either in the same country or in different countries and at different times.

41
That is a very common argument. Now how does Socrates dispose of this problem? Now
we must understand what he really asserts.
Student: He seems to me to change the levels of abstraction because he says, and gets
the interlocutor to agree, that the just in one place is just in another. But, for example, it is
considered just in Carthage to sacrifice one’s children; it is not just in Athens to sacrifice
one’s children. So law on this one level of abstraction—there is only one law, there is
only one type.
LS: I wish only that you could rephrase this terribly abstract term “level of abstraction”
into something more concrete.
Student: I think he is working on what he considers a more basic element, the thing of
lawness as opposed to laws in general.
LS: Now let us look at a simple example. Everywhere people say what is just is just, and
what is unjust is unjust. The just is opposed to the unjust. That is true, but what they
understand by the content differs radically. So the argument is indeed of an atrocious
abstractness which completely evades the issue, because what he says about justness is of
course equally true about noble and is equally true about being. And you see, he gives
one example which shows how atrocious the procedure is, and that is the only example
which has nothing directly to do with this high and mighty thing, namely, the question of
heavy and light. What does he do in the case of heavy and light? How does he express it
there? Here he defines it. He says the things which weigh more are considered heavier
and the things which weigh less are considered lighter. So here heavy and light are
defined, and therefore of course the statement is not completely meaningless as it is in the
case of the other points—just, noble, and being—[where] it is a mere formalism which
completely evades the issue. And the comrade is intelligent enough, as we will see
immediately, to see that this argument is of no value and doesn’t meet the issue at all.
These examples, however, of the heavy and light differ from the other examples for the
following reason. In all other cases he uses the positive: the just things, the unjust things,
and so on, and in the case of the noble things, too. But when he speaks of heavy and light
he uses the comparative, i.e., the heavier, the lighter.
Now that refers to a discussion which we do not find in this dialogue but, for example, at
the beginning of the Euthyphro, where a discussion regarding the spheres of human
disagreement and conflict28 goes on. What are the grounds of conflict? Socrates says29
[that] conflict arises from disagreement regarding the good, the noble, and the just. And
here in such cases agreement can be reached only with difficulty. But there are other
spheres where agreement can be reached very easily, and those are the cases where we
can count or measure or weigh. Because if one man says another is six feet tall, and
someone else says he is seven, the solution is very simple. But if someone says this is a
just action, and another says it is an unjust action, this is in many cases of the greatest
complexity. Here is where the difference of degree—heavier and lighter—and therefore
of mathematic exactness comes in, whereas it is not so in the case of the noble, just, and
good. This indicates to us the problem. You see also, by the way, the examples: he

42
introduces the Persians instead of the descendants of Athamas. Again, I cannot explain
that, except [to mention] the fact that the Persians were of course enemies of the Greeks,
and in addition they were in certain respects regarded as more rational than the Greeks.
But I can only mention this here. Now let us go on.
Reader:
[Com.:] In your present way of putting it, Socrates, the same things appear to be accepted
as lawful both by us and by the rest of the world, always: but when I reflect that we are
continually changing our laws in all sorts of ways, I cannot bring myself to assent.
(316b-c)
LS: “We do not see.” Who? Who are the “we”? Well, in such cases it is not necessary to
give an unambiguous answer. One can leave it open. But one at least must see what the
alternatives are.
Student: You mean, “by us and the rest of the world?” It occurs to me that by “us” he
means the Athenians.
LS: Yes. That is of some importance, because if changeability, changing of laws, is
something bad, then of course the city which changes laws most frequently is inferior to a
city which changes laws les frequently. And that would throw light on Athens. We must
see that light. Now let us continue.
Reader:
[Soc.:] Perhaps it is because you do not reflect that when we change our pieces at
draughts they are the same pieces. But look at it, as I do, in this way. Have you in your
time come across a treatise on healing the sick?
[Com.:] I have.
[Soc.:] Then do you know to what art such a treatise belongs?
[Com.:] I do: medicine.
[Soc.:] And you give the name of doctors to those who have knowledge of these matters?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] Then do those who have knowledge accept the same views on the same things, or
do they accept different views?
[Com.:] The same, in my opinion.
[Soc.:] Do Greeks only accept the same views as Greeks on what they know, or do
foreigners also agree on these matters, both among themselves and with Greeks?
[Com.:] It is quite inevitable, I should say, that those who know should agree in accepting
the same views, whether Greeks or foreigners.
[Soc.:] Well answered. And do they so always?
[Com.:] Yes, it is so always.
[Soc.:] And do doctors on their part, in their treatises on health, write what they accept as
real?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] Then these treatises of the doctors are medical, and medical laws.
[Com.:] Medical, to be sure. (316c-e)

43

LS: Let us stop here for one moment. What is the consideration which he now brings in
by which he comes somewhat closer to the argument? What is the new point which is
now mentioned by Socrates as throwing light on the problem?
Student: Expertise.
LS: Yes.
Student: Could one say knowledge?
LS: Both; it doesn’t make any difference. Say, knowledge. Why is this so important?
Don’t forget that we have this question: the manyness and changeability of laws as an
objection to the possible truth of laws. And it was said that since human beings disagree
so widely regarding laws by changing the laws all the time, the definition can’t be right.
Student: He makes the argument that among human beings this may be so but human
beings do not always know. Among those who know there is agreement.
LS: So in other words, let us forget about human beings in general and let us limit
ourselves to experts. Now you must not of course think of our notion, as it is so common,
of a constantly progressing science. That was not so fast and so visible, at any rate, in
former times. Now do physicians disagree regarding the healing of diseases to the same
degree to which cities disagree as to how theft should be punished?
Student: Well, it seems to me that in this whole argument, although I am not familiar
with Greek medicine and its practice in the ancient world, that he must have in mind the
doctor in the ideal. Because it seems to me that a doctor in Greece might treat a wound in
one way and a doctor in Carthage treat a wound another way.
LS: But that problem is discussed, for example, in the first book of Plato’s Republic. The
distinction is made between the artisans unqualifiedly spoken and the artisan precisely
spoken. I mean, as knower and as knowers they would not disagree. Since, however,
every empirical physician is not a complete knower, this difficulty would arise. But the
crucial step is this, that the law is now taken from the hands of the multitude, of the nonexpert, and we are now considering [those who are] entirely experts. Why does he take
writings, by the way? Why does he take the writings of physicians, as distinguished from
the doctrines or speeches of physicians?
Student: They are more lasting.
LS: Because the laws are, in a city like Athens, primarily the written laws. Laws are
writings. They ought to be the writings of experts. Now let us then look at the writings of
other experts, and let us see whether these writings are changed all the time and vary
from country to country. And the assertion is made, uncontested by the interlocutor—
perhaps wrongly uncontested but still uncontested—that wherever we have an art or

44
science, then all possessors of that art or science, regardless of time and country, would
agree. And therefore we must see how this would work out if applied to laws.
Why is medicine chosen as an example? That question is very simple. Let us look at the
end of the dialogue (page 420) and read this briefly.
Reader:
[Soc.:] [Come then, in good friendship’s name:] if someone were to ask usxiii what it is
that the good lawgiver and apportioner for the body distributes to it when he makes it
better, we should say, if we were to make a correct and brief answer, that it was food and
labor; the former to strengthen, and the latter to exercise and brace it.
[Com.:] And we should be right.
[Soc.:] And if he then proceeded to ask us—And what might that be which the good
lawgiver and apportioner distributes to the soul to make it better?—what would be our
answer if we would avoid being ashamed of ourselves and our years?
[Com.:] This time I am unable to say.
[Soc.:] But indeed it is shameful for the soul of either of us to be found ignorant of those
things within it on which its good and abject states depend, while it has studied those that
pertain to the body and rest. (321c-d)
LS: So in other words, the legislator is the physician of the soul, and therefore the
simplest parallel is the physician of the body. And why is he the physician of the soul
(which sounds very strange if you look empirically at law, but we have to take a loftier
view)? What is the function of the legislator?
Student: Well, he has to cure it by the use of medicines which are painful.
LS: For example. That is not a bad answer at all. Punishment, as you know, plays a very
great role in law, and punishment is comparable to the things which the physician does to
our body.
Student: Is it because the legislator has to do primarily with the health of the citizen as
human?
LS: The health of the soul. As they say, the good legislator makes the citizens good men.
And good men means men of a healthy soul.
Student: Is it the doctor who makes men healthy?
LS: Yes, we come to that subtle distinction later. Surely that is the point which was
mentioned earlier, that there seems to be a greater emphasis on the restorative activity, on
punishment, than on the constitutive activity of the gymnastic trainer. We come to that
later. We cannot take up everything at the same time.
Student: Why does not the interlocutor object that all doctors do not agree?
xiii

In the Loeb: “someone should ask us”

45

LS: In the first place, the Greeks had a very high opinion of technai, of the arts. And they
say all the time that, say, for example, two carpenters, given that one is not a blunderer
but that they are [both] really experts, agree easily, and the others listen and don’t even
understand, and they have to explain to them. That happens all the time. There is such a
thing. When you go to very difficult questions in a given art, then there may be
disagreement. But30 in the case of a wound or in the case of a fever, the physicians know
what you have to do and also the reasons why you have to do it.
Student: Well, it seems to me that the agreement could be, 31 you see, that the art cannot
be wrong, or the science cannot be wrong. And so, if he would agree to this much, he
would also, I think, be forced to agree that the law cannot be wrong. In the same sense in
which Socrates—
LS: Yes, sure, that is what Socrates is driving at. You remember the question: Law must
be a science or an art if it is to be respectable. Let us take the simpler case, and perhaps
the more convincing case, of art. So the conclusion would be that the legislator is
something like a physician, or you can also say like a carpenter. And therefore, in order
to be a legislator you have to have proper training in the art of legislation. In most cities
the laws were made by people without proper training, and therefore the question arises
whether they can be laws at all, because they are merely the utterances of ignoramuses.
That is the implication. There is a very radical criticism of law implied in this very
question.
Student: It would seem that this isn’t true opinion anymore, that it is immutable and
demonstrable.
LS: But as I told you, this is a very external dialogue between Socrates and a nameless
comrade, where this important point—that knowledge is not merely true opinion, but true
opinion with an understanding of the reasons—is disregarded. What you say reminds me
of a Hegelian joke. Someone wants to buy fruit; and then he goes to a fruit stand, and the
man says: I have apples, bananas, and peaches. And then he doesn’t buy [any], because
these are apples and so on. But of course they all are fruits. Now something [that] is both
true opinion and knowledge is true opinion. You see, this is the genus: true opinion. Then
we have true opinion and merely true opinion. And then we have knowledge, because
knowledge has something in addition to true opinion, namely, the reasons for it. That is
all.
Student: I thought he could have made things simpler for himself and for this
interlocutor by simply saying that it is knowledge of what is.
LS: But there is a transition. Because the common view is that a decree of the polis,
dogma poleōs, is sufficient. Now what is a decree? A decree is arrived at by deliberation,
and the decree is the end of the deliberation. And in this sense it is opinion, the result of a
reasoning—whether good or bad is uninteresting. And now he leads over. The definition
which he gives shows the origin of the final definition, i.e., law is philosophy. It shows

46
the connection with the simple empirical definition, i.e., law is the decree of the polis.
True opinion is the link between the common, simplistic view of law and the
supersophistical view which Socrates here uses for reasons which will not be altogether
irrelevant. Now what Socrates suggests then at this point is this: if we want to settle the
question of law, and law must be something technical, something like an art or the
product of an art (we can leave this open), then let us look at other arts. And then we see
that in an art as art there is no difference among experts regardless of time or place. 32 The
first example used is medicine, and then he uses some other examples. Let us see what
these others are. But [characteristically], he now compares law not to art33 but to
technical writings, because he thinks primarily of laws as written laws. And therefore the
direct parallel in the arts to laws would be not the arts themselves but the writings by
artisans or artists, the technical writings. Now let us see how he goes on from here. He
uses some other examples.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And are agricultural treatises likewise agricultural laws?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And whose are the treatises and accepted rules about garden-work?
[Com.:] Gardeners’.
[Soc.:] So these are our gardening laws.
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] Of people who know how to control gardens?
LS: “How to rule” would be a better, literal translation.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And it is the gardeners who know.
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And whose are the treatises and accepted rules about the confection of tasty
dishes?
[Com.:] Cooks’.
[Soc.:] Then there are laws of cookery?
[Com.:] Of cookery.
[Soc.:] Of people who know, it would seem, how to control the confection of tasty
dishes?
[Com.:] Yes. (316e-17a)
LS: You see this slight qualification, “as it seems,” or “it would seem,” in the case of
cooking. Does anyone know why he makes this reservation in the case of cooking which
he does not make in the case of agriculture and the other examples mentioned?
Student: The Gorgias.
LS: It is a sham art. The art of cooking is presented as a sham art. We had another
example of a sham art here before. Do you remember that? One must keep these things in
mind.

47

Student: Diviners.
LS: Diviners, soothsaying. That may prove important later on.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And it is the cooks, they say, who know?
[Com.:] Yes, it is they who know.
LS: You see, “they say” may very well be the cooks. The cooks say they know, just as
the soothsayers assert that they are diviners. You see, the comrade has no difficulty
regarding the cooks. That shows the difficulty.
Reader:
[Soc.:] [Very well;] and now whose are the treatises and accepted rules about the
government of a state? Of the people who know how to control states, are they not?
[Com.:] I agree.
[Soc.:] And is it anyone else than statesmen and royal persons who know?
[Com.:] It is they, to be sure.
[Soc.:] Then what people call “laws” are treatises of state,—writings of kings and good
men.
[Com.:] That is true. (317a-b)
LS: Now you see already the very great political implication of the step taken. Laws, at
least written laws, we all would admit are writings. But writings of whom? Answer: If
they are to be respectable they must be the writings of experts. And who are these
experts? “Kings and good men.” Now what about a law passed in the Athenian
assembly? Is this a law written by a king or by good men? Certainly not necessarily: a
king, strictly speaking, didn’t exist. So we are very far away from Athens.
Student: He substitutes good men for politikos. Is the implication that politikoi are not
good men?
LS: But on the other hand, you will see that they are really interchangeable. In the first
place, he says the political men and the kingly men; later on, he changes the order to
kings and good men. And in addition, it is clear also from the [. . .] they are really so
close together, in both cases. Now go on.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And must it not be that those who know will not write differently at different
times on the same matters?
[Com.:] They will not.
[Soc.:] Nor will they ever change one set of accepted rules for another in respect of the
same matters.
[Com.:] No, indeed.
[Soc.:] So if we see some persons anywhere doing this—

48

LS: You see, “anywhere.” He does not say explicitly in Athens, but Athens is of course
included in “anywhere.”
Reader:
[Soc.:] [So if we see some persons anywhere doing this,] shall we say that those who do
so have knowledge, or have none?
[Com.:] That they have no knowledge.
[Soc.:] And again, whatever is right, we shall say is lawful for each person, whether in
medicine or in cookery or in gardening?
[Com.:] Yes.
[Soc.:] And whatever is not right we shall decline to call lawful?
LS: “We shall no longer call that lawful.” No longer. In other words, we make now a
clean34 [break] with our past. We will not call35 something lawful [anymore] which
merely is in agreement with the positive law.
Reader:
[Com.:] We shall no longer do so.xiv
[Soc.:] Then it becomes unlawful.
[Com.:] It must.
LS: Or illegal. It is the same.
Reader:
[Soc.:] And again, in writings about what is just and unjust, and generally about the
government of a state and the proper way of governing it, that which is right is the king's
law, but not so that which is not right, though it seems to be law to those who do not
know; for it is unlawful.
[Com.:] Yes.
LS: Now you see the break with the common opinion is now complete. I mean, almost
anything called an Athenian law is unlawful. That is now definite. And you see our
enlightened young man has no objections whatever. Very interesting to see.
Reader:
[Soc.:] Then we rightly admitted that law is discovery of reality. (317b-d)
LS: Of “being.” Now granting the relevance and truth of this argument, did we really
rightly agree? You don’t think so?
Student: Well, initially it was agreed that “it wishes,” and then the transition was made
to being. At this point it is more justified to say “to be” instead of “wishes” because you
have eliminated error.
xiv

In the Loeb: “We shall decline.”

49
LS: Now what strikes me most—we may come to your point later—is this: law is said to
be discovery of being, and that is said unqualified[ly], that is to say, of all being. But
what is the subject matter of the political art? All beings?
Student: Man, obviously.
LS: Yes, or the city. Because medicine or agriculture deals with another kind of being.
That remains a grave question. Of course one can say: All right, law is discovery of being
in so far as it is a discovery of a certain kind of being. One could perhaps dispose of the
difficulty in this way. But can you now restate your difficulty?
Student: The first thing that struck me is the transition from “wishes to be the discovery
of being,” and now Socrates for the first time himself says “is.”
LS: Yes. But this makes it in a way much easier, doesn’t it? Because now we can be
certain that laws are available because law is not merely a tendency toward the truth but it
in fact discovers the truth. So the reservation which Socrates originally had against the
assumption that the truth is available is now dropped. That facilitates things greatly. But
what new difficulty does it bring in, in your opinion?
Student: Well, I don’t quite see that he is justified in doing it. I agree that it facilitates
matters.
LS: All right, but he drops the difficulty. And what is the difficulty? You see, if law tends
to be the discovery of the truth, then the empirical laws could all be laws. But if law is
discovery of truth, hardly any laws are laws. So that the first definition was more
conservative than the present one. The present one excludes the nice legal character 36
[from] almost all laws.
Student: Couldn’t you also say that when Socrates said it tends to discover truth, that
Socrates himself was only in a state of true opinion and had not yet reached knowledge?
And it was only by meeting these objections presented dialectically against him that he
achieved knowledge of what law is? The defense of his definition being in a sense the test
of its truth.
LS: Surely, but in the process of defending it he changes it.
Student: Well, his state of mind changes from one of true opinion, perhaps, to one of
knowledge.
LS: That is easy to say but it must be proven that it is so. Now what are the premises
which he makes? The premise is that knowledge of what orders the city is as much
possible as knowledge of what orders the body, or [of] what orders a field which we want
to sow, or maybe [of] what the cook wants to do. That is the premise. But is it not a
sensible premise prior to a deeper investigation—that there could be art or technical
knowledge regarding the ordering of cities as well as regarding the ordering of other

50
things. So the real question, the question which does not come up at all here, is this: Why
in the world are laws everywhere made by nonexperts? How does it come [about]? What
induces people who are so willing to follow experts—physicians, carpenters,
blacksmiths, and what have you—[to] want the laws to be made by themselves, who are
nonexperts? That, after all, is the simple question. To say it is mere folly is not sufficient,
and of course it is not Socrates’s point.
Student: It seems to me that there are a lot of difficulties involved in drawing that
conclusion from the arguments which are given. One thing is the problem of the
discovery of being—you know, about the notion of the oneness of being. It could be
argued that being is one and not one in different respects.
LS: Yes, which Socrates—Plato—would of course admit.
Student: Which would mean then that there is one law and many laws, and the
manyness—
LS: Surely, but the interesting point is this, that up to now the interlocutor has gone along
with Socrates without raising this difficulty. Of course the interlocutor is of no interest;
he is a certain human type, you can say, at the most. That is all. But there must be
therefore some substantive reason for that. What is it? What speaks in favor of this
peculiar abstraction used in the dialogue up to this point—the abstraction from this
manyness? What speaks in favor of it?
Student: The analogy with the arts.
LS: Sure, one could of course say then that it is a false analogy. But still, what justifies a
provisional use of a questionable analogy in this case? A very obvious fact. Granted that
there must be a great variety of laws and that there is a good case for changing laws from
time to time, must there not be something identical and unchangeable if the variety and
change are to be made soundly? You change a law. The least you want is that it should
not be a change for the worse. Then you have to have a standard which ultimately is the
standard of human goodness. So in other words, the necessity of an ultimate and
unchangeable standard justifies, in a certain state of abstraction, this argument. Later on
we have to go into whether we do not need something intermediate between the highest
unchangeable and the legitimately changeable laws.
I would like to mention one point for the understanding of the next argument. When he
speaks here at the top of page 406, in Greek you see diakosmēseōs dioikein, and the use
of the dia. This foreshadows the following discussion, as you will see, because he raises
now the following question. Here the defense is finished, but then Socrates brings in a
new consideration by saying: “Furthermore, let us consider also the following thing.”
And here you see again dia [in] diatheōmetha [and] dianeimai. Now here he brings in a
new consideration, because what we have heard up to now was very general. He
continues to compare law to arts, but now he compares law to a specific aspect of the

51
arts. And what that aspect is appears from the first question. Now let us read the first two
questions here of Socrates.
Reader:
[Soc.:] Now let us observe the further point about it. Who has knowledge of distributing
seed over land?
[Com.:] A farmer.
[Soc.:] And does he distribute the suitable seed to each sort of land? (317d)
LS: Let us stop here because we can’t go beyond this. Now the question which now
arises37 [is] the question which elucidates for the first time the question of justice. Law
and justice had been identified in a certain passage, as you will remember. But no
reflection was made on justice. Now here he brings up the question of justice. Justice is
primarily distribution. Every art, Socrates contends—straining things somewhat—is a
form of distributing things to things. For example, the farmer distributes seed to the
various plots of land. And he will go on and give other examples of this form of
distribution. Therefore, the legislator is a man who distributes different things to different
people; for example, different rewards, different punishments, and all this kind of thing.
The legislative art is an art of distribution, and in this sense it is the same as justice. But
here, you see, he makes a slight change in the formula. Who is the expert, the knower, in
distributing seeds over land? The farmer. And he is the one who gives the proper seed to
each land. Now land, the Greek word gē, has this ambiguity, just as in English, [meaning]
the earth and also the land. Now in German it is clearer than in English. Here you see
already an indication of the difficulty to which we come later, because if justice and if
legislation consist in assigning to everyone what is good for him, what follows from that
regarding law?
Student: The manyness of law?
LS: Yes, and of course the opposite of unchangeability. Because if X, who is to be
assigned something, changes, something else has to be changed as well. So the point of
view which the interlocutor has—unchangeability is the criterion of truth—proves now to
be completely problematic when we think that through. On the contrary, we get a
different solution. We get another criticism of law. Not its changeability is bad but its
insufficient changeability, because every law is pronounced as general: All people who
do this and this will be punished in this and this way, and no sufficient distinction is made
regarding the great varieties of human beings. So we get now a very strange justification
of the manyness and an attack on the oneness. Not every one is of higher dignity than the
many. There are spheres in which the manyness is so to speak truer than the oneness. And
why is that so? Why is, for example, a law of nature, one law of nature of much higher
intellectual dignity than the many phenomena? Because they [i.e., the many phenomena]
don’t teach us anything which we do not have in that law. But why is it [the] opposite in
the case of human laws? What is the difference between the human laws and any laws of
nature?
Student: The individual human laws may reflect accurately the variety of natures.

52

LS: That is true, but what light does your remark throw on the character of human law?
Student: That it must vary with the variations in nature.
LS: Yes, but it can’t. It can’t as law. Otherwise it is no longer law. Law must have a
certain level of generality.
Student: Apparently there is only one form of right society or right soil to begin with. If
all laws must be the same and can’t vary, then you should only have one type of situation.
LS: That is manifestly untrue.
Student: It is untrue that this is the situation but it ought to be, apparently.
LS: Yes, but how can you do that? You would have to change the nature of man to bring
that about, and this is a thought wholly absent from Plato’s mind. Now to use a most
simple term: the human law is arbitrary. It is conventional. It is a kind of convenient
abbreviation which is very useful but which contains also its dangers. And the problem
with which Socrates is confronted here is really this: 38 to make a denial39 [of] the
problem,40 [of] this aspect of the problem of the one and the many. Essentially the one
had a higher status than the many from Plato’s point of view. You see it very simply in
the case of the standard of human perfection: this can only be one. But there are human
devices of the utmost practical importance, laws, which raise this claim to be
[themselves] the one unchangeable confronted with the many varied situations. And this
claim has to be distinguished radically from the unity of the standard. The laws, the
human laws, are arbitrary and conventional. This doesn’t mean that they are crazy, of
course, but they are questionable in a way in which the natural standard cannot be
questioned. And we must see how this is worked out.
We have a few minutes left, and I would like to know whether this point has become
clear. You see, what is going on is very strange. Socrates seems to be the defender of the
one unchangeable law against this somewhat cynical young man to whom he talks. But in
fact the young man is the one who brings up the issue of the unchangeability of the law,
and Socrates goes with him for a certain time. The fundamental problem, to repeat, is
this. There is a kind of, let us say, spurious oneness of the merely human law contrasted
with the genuine oneness of the standards of human perfection which cannot be changed,
the changeability of which would lead to absolute chaos, whereas the changeability of the
laws is the necessary consequence of their merely human origin. There is only one more
step, which we will read this next time, and then Socrates is through with what, to the
interlocutor at any rate, seems to be the proof that law is the discovery of being: law is
wisdom. And this ambiguity remains: Is it universal wisdom, knowledge of everything,
or is it knowledge only of the ordering of the polis? But this ambiguity, as we have seen,
is not groundless. The examples given by the interlocutor of the changes of laws, the laws
regarding human sacrifice as well as regarding funerals—human laws necessarily contain
important parts, the truth of which cannot be established without philosophic knowledge,

53
without knowledge of the whole. The examples, to repeat, [are] the human sacrifices and
the funerals. To some extent political science, if we call it that, is of course independent
of other disciplines, because the polis is specifically different from other beings. But a
complete separation is impossible, a complete separation of political science from . . . is
of course impossible. But there is no simple and clear formula possible for this relation,
and therefore the ambiguity here: Is it a science and really the universal science, or is it
an art, if a distinguished art, among the many arts?
After this brief discussion now about the legislative art as a distributive art, and therefore
as an art which in its perfection would be incompatible with law because of the infinite
variety of circumstance,41 Socrates will raise the question—forgetting the complexity—
and simply say that law is said to be the discovery of being and therefore unchangeable.
He returns to the surface. And then he says: Well, what would be a real law? Answer: A
law which is unchangeable. But what does unchangeable mean? We must not expect the
impossible; say a law which is extremely old, that is to say [one] which had undergone
very little change, the only change being its coming into being. And then what is the
oldest law in the whole world? Answer: the law of Minos in Crete. Hence this must be
the best law. But this comes up only after the whole problem of law, at least the crucial
points, namely, first, the question of knowledge: Can law be respectable if it is not the
work of wisdom? And secondly: Can law be at all respectable given the fact that in order
to be truly just it would have to be of infinite flexibility, which is incompatible with the
very essence of law? Those of you who have read the Statesman know that this is the
great argument of the Statesman, and repeated also in the third book of Aristotle’s
Politics. Is law as such not irrational because of its fundamental inflexibility, and
certainly inadequate flexibility? But the interesting point is that even in such an external
dialogue, such a provisional dialogue, this issue comes up too. Or, differently stated, in
the Statesman these terrible things and somewhat shocking things are stated [not] by
Socrates but by a stranger from Elea. Here they are alluded to, at any rate, by Socrates
himself. We must leave it at that.

1

Deleted “that.”
Deleted “that.”
3
Deleted “as.”
4
Deleted “it is.”
5
Deleted “and.”
6
Deleted “is.”
7
Deleted “of.”
8
Deleted “but.”
9
Deleted “makes.”
10
Moved “is” and “the question.”
11
Deleted “there is.” Moved “say.”
12
Deleted “it.”
13
Moved “of Socrates.”
14
Deleted “fact of.”
15
Deleted “as.”
16
Deleted “the.”
2

54

17

Deleted “do not.”
Deleted “in the origin.”
19
Moved “cannot be rationally settled.”
20
Deleted “that.”
21
Deleted “him.”
22
Deleted “But that.”
23
Deleted “if you want to.”
24
Moved “in Greek.”
25
Deleted “whoever.”
26
Deleted “what is.”
27
Deleted “did.”
28
Deleted “what are the grounds of conflict?”
29
Deleted “the.”
30
Deleted “what you have to do.”
31
Deleted “on.”
32
Deleted “And.”
33
Changed from “But he compares now characteristically law not to the art.”
34
Deleted “slate.”
35
Moved “anymore.”
36
Deleted “to.”
37
Deleted “and.”
38
Deleted "that.”
39
Deleted “to.”
40
Deleted “to.”
41
Deleted “then.”
18

55
Session 3: January 13, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] i —the interlocutor never. In the Hipparchus it is just the
opposite. The interlocutor swears three times, Socrates never. Now this fellow here in our
dialogue is a bold fellow—you remember his statement about the old laws—an
enlightened, daring fellow. And he is led back to the old code of Minos. In the
Hipparchus we have the opposite kind of a man, a cautious and temperate young man.
And he is brought to admiration for that Athenian tyrant. So the moderate fellow is taught
a daring thing, and the daring fellow is taught a moderate thing. And this has the
following principle. The Greek word for daring is andreios, manly, the male—maleness,
literally translated. Now the male is distinguished from the female, and the Greeks had
certain notions about the psychology of the two sexes, notions which I believe are still
widespread in spite of certain publication, in which the male should be manly . . . going
out, and when he talks, talk loudly. And the woman should be at home and be silent—
almost invisible, as Pericles puts it in his funeral speech. So this fundamental difference,
the most fundamental difference within the human race, [between] male and female,
corresponds somehow to the difference between courage and modesty. Modesty would
also be in Greek sōphrosynē, which I translate by moderation.
Now,1 however, the complication arises that we find this difference, certainly among the
males: there are daring males and there are modest males. And the complete male human
being would combine the two opposite qualities of daring and restraint in the proper way.
But that is very rare, and therefore Plato sometimes [represents one or the other], for
example, in the Statesman and Sophist: in the Sophist the interlocutor is Theaetetus, who
is a moderate man; and in the supplementary dialogue, the Statesman, the interlocutor is
the young Socrates, who is a daring fellow. But the most striking example is of course
[in] the Republic, where Glaucon represents the daring and Adeimantus the modest,
moderate type. The complete solution would be one in which both opposite qualities are
identical, and that is possible only in one human activity, according to Plato: philosophy,
or however you call it. Because the boldness of the philosopher consists in his caution,
and his caution in his . . . Is this intelligible—that boldness can consist in caution, and
really be identical with caution? Is this intelligible? Well, ordinarily we take many things
for granted which we shouldn’t take for granted. Now if you question that, in one sense it
is an act of boldness, but in another sense an act of caution. In other words, you should
not rush [in] where angels fear to tread. From this point of view. So that is also here in
this dialogue, and I could give some other examples too of that. This is characteristic of
the Minos and illustrates the relation of the two dialogues. Now let us read the end.
Reader:
[Soc.:] if someone should ask us what it is that the good lawgiver and apportioner for the
body distributes to it when he makes it better, we should say, if we were to make a
correct and brief answer, that it was food and labour; the former to strengthen, and the
latter to exercise and brace it. (321c)
i

The transcript picks up in the middle of a comparison of features of the Minos and the
Hipparchus.

56

LS: Is this clear? I mean the trainer ascribes, assigns, to the body food and toil in order to
increase the body by food and to train it and brace it by toil. Now the application of that
to our case:
Reader:
[Soc:] And if he then proceeded to ask us—And what might that be which the good
lawgiver and apportioner distributes to the soul to make it better?—what would be our
answer if we would avoid being ashamed of ourselves and our years?
[Com.:] This time I am unable to say. (321d)
LS: Could you answer the question? What would he probably have thought? What is the
food of the soul which makes it grow, and what is the toil of the soul which exercises it
and braces it? It is interesting that you all hesitate. We all are in the same position as our
friend here, the comrade.
Student: Knowledge on the one hand, and justice on the other.
LS: Something of the sort. Knowledge I think would be a sufficient answer from
Socrates’s point of view. But you would get into trouble immediately because he would
say: Do you mean the knowledge which the carpenter possesses? No, of course not. That
which the general public possesses? No. Then what is that kind of knowledge which you
mean? And then you would get into other troubles. So it is as good to have it end here as
one page later. Now the last sentence.
Reader:
[Soc.:] But indeed it is shameful for the soul of either of us to be found ignorant of those
things within it on which its good and abject states depend, while it has studied those that
pertain to the body and the other things. ii (321c-d)
LS: What is the practical meaning in the context of this end, that they do not know what
the function of the legislator is?
Student: Well, they wouldn’t go out politically and start condemning Athenian
democracy.
LS: For example. But also, since the condemnation of Athenian democracy was only
implied—and what was explicitly done2?
Student: The praise of Minos.
LS: Minos. The praise of Minos has been made by completely incompetent people, sure.
The whole argument must be repeated in a much more complete way, and then of course
we have already our assignment for the Laws, that we must find out in the Laws what is it
that the legislator has to assign to the souls of men?
ii

In the Loeb: “and the rest” for “and the other things.”

57

And here, if you would look at this. The soul: our soul, he says. Our soul. Singular. And
then he turns to the plural, souls. The souls. And it is implied that the soul has parts. And
then you see at the end he speaks of the body in the singular. This reference is important
only as a last reminder of this great question to which we found so many allusions
throughout the dialogue: [the question of] one and many. The one soul and the many
souls. And then if you look at the one soul of the individual, again a manyness—the soul
has parts. With this hint or this reminder the dialogue closes. To repeat only this point:
the question of one and many is crucial in the case of law because of the oneness of the
law compared with the manyness of cases, for example. Now what is the status of this
oneness as distinguished from the oneness of what some people would call a concept, a
genuine concept? The concept as genuine concept is truly one. That is not in any way
arbitrary. But the oneness of the law is based on a fundamental arbitrary abbreviation of
the complexity of the cases. I believe we can leave it at that.
Student: Why did he specifically call this myth the tragic myth of Minos?
LS: Because it was apparently made, used by tragic poets.
Student: Well, I wondered why it couldn’t be comic.
LS: What would you say?
Student: Well, I don’t know. My thought is that tragedy has much more to do with
friends and enemies, and to the extent that Minos had to be hated because he was an
enemy, a conqueror, and the tragic poet served the demos which permits . . . to go and see
Minos would be as it were, freedom.
LS: You are quite right. If enemies, [foreign enemies], are presented 3 in the comedy, that
is really never serious. The true enmity, say, between Athens and Sparta, becomes in a
way mild if comically presented, whereas in tragedy the enmity in its full implications
can be brought out until it leads even to killing and being killed.
Student: The tragedy is somehow necessary to . . . that fundamental law of the city, or
that fundamental difference between friends and strangers, friends and enemies, whereas
comedy somehow relieves from that.
LS: That is true.
Student: And to that extent it would probably be another step in the connection of
tragedy with something like the laws.
LS: Yes, but of course there is also one very simple consideration. The tragedy is taken
much more seriously of course than the comedy, at least prior to some deeper
considerations. And since we remain here altogether in a provisional understanding,

58
tragedy, which is the most moving thing and at the same time [the] most pleasing to the
many, remains . . . iii
Student: But then [when] one thinks of slander and blasphemy, which is what 4 [Socrates]
accuses 5 [the comrade] of, one thinks of comedy much more than one does [of] tragedy.
And this fundamentally is what he accuses6 [the comrade] of having done. It certainly
wouldn’t have appeared to be slander and blasphemy to anybody who read tragedy.
LS: But that leads further. Let me leave it at this remark. What is going on, in this
dialogue at any rate, is absolutely untragic and has much more to do with comedy than
with tragedy, and7 this reveals the whole contrast [to be] a much deeper and richer
contrast.
Student: And that comedy has a certain function in leading to a broader piety than a
simply civic piety.
LS: Yes, yes. That is true. That is true, but that leads to a very long question in itself, and
we may take this up when we discuss the Banquet on another occasion. Now is there any
other question regarding the Minos?
Student: I was wondering what you think of the suggestion here. When 8 [Socrates] refers
to the poets here he doesn’t refer simply to the tragedians, but he refers also to poets of
every kind. It seems in doing so he really casts doubt on Minos, because occasionally we
find suggestions by Plato that poets were divinely inspired, particularly certain poets.
Now this would be in opposition to the [giving of] inspiration by Zeus to Minos. It would
also cast doubt upon those laws.
LS: Now you seem to have a special passage in mind. Can you tell me what it is?
Student: It is9 [at 320e7 to 10]: “And this was the mistake which Minos made, in waging
war on this city of ours, which besides all its various culture has poets of every kind, and
especially those who write tragedy.”
LS: “Poets of various kinds in other poetry as well as in tragedy.” And what inference do
you draw from that?
Student: Well, the inference I draw is that this casts doubt on the fact that one can trust
the laws of Minos entirely. It seems to be an indication that Plato would be suggesting
that since the poets are also divinely inspired, at least some poets are—
LS: But who says that they are divinely inspired?
Student: Various people say so. I think in the Laws I can recall one place where a
reference is made which indicates the divine inspiration.
iii

The transcript does not indicate whether Strauss continued his speech inaudibly or was
interrupted by the student.

59

LS: Sure, that is said. Well, that is a great problem. You see, strictly speaking Plato
doesn’t say a thing. Never forget that. Say, Socrates says it. Sometimes. But what does
the same Socrates say in the Republic about poets?
Student: What does he say? Well, he says a number of things, not all of them terribly
complimentary.
LS: Well, he goes so far as to say [that] a poet, or a painter for that matter, is the third
removed from truth, so that a carpenter who makes the table is nearer [to] the truth than a
painter or poet who celebrates that table. You can still call this in a way divine inspiration
if you want to, but it is a very poor kind of divine inspiration. And what one can say is
only this. One must consider every statement in its context if he wants to find out what
Plato really thought about poets. Every utterance of Socrates has a clear meaning in the
context. To what extent this meaning survives, if taken out of the context, we must see.
That cannot be settled. But one point which you made is quite good. In this dialogue, at
any rate, Homer and Hesiod are respected, are used. But we have seen that this use is a
very problematic one. But still nothing is explicitly said against them. But the Athenian
poets, the tragic poets, are rejected as witnesses. Is that not clear? I believe that what you
were trying to do was this. The lawgiver is divinely inspired. The poets are not divinely
inspired.
Student: The tragic poets.
LS: The tragedy, yes. But since Homer and Hesiod are at least externally accepted, we
cannot draw any further conclusion from that. On the contrary, one could even say this:
precisely this remark about tragedy could be taken to mean that whereas the highest
achievement of the legislator could be said to lead the souls in the highest degree, he is
not necessarily one who pleases the people and makes them enjoy themselves. That is not
the function of a lawgiver. But if there should be people who can combine both things—
guiding the souls and making the souls enjoy themselves, as the tragic poet is said to
do—could this not be a higher achievement than that of the legislator, if he can do both?
But we know much too little about it to decide that. The tragic poets come in here
primarily as Athenian poets who give utterance to an Athenian prejudice, which is not
very good. You know, it is not the highest level. Perhaps if you think about this you will
understand better this very strange and, in a way, absurd statement in the tenth book of
the Republic, where the poets are said to be imitators of imitators, and perhaps even of
other imitators—third removed—meaning that the poets are not something respectable, if
that [their being third removed] is the last word. Plato contends that to some extent that is
so, but he knows that it is not simply so. And I believe we will find in the Laws some
evidence of a much more sophisticated judgment on poetry.
Student: In what sense?
LS: That the poets are in one sense subject to the polis, but in another sense, they are the
rulers, the invisible rulers of the polis. And then they would appear in a different light.

60

Student: A more speculative question. If law is essentially irrational—
LS: In the sense defined?
Student: Yes, would you say that the philosophy of existentialism is presently focusing
attention upon the specific situation rather than the law which has existed to guide
behavior in specific situation? In other words, existentialism is peculiarly concerned with
the specific rather than the laws.
LS: You mean with the individual case?
Student: Yes.
LS: Yes, but that would be a somewhat narrow view of the situation. One thing one could
say in a very provisional discussion of that topic is that for existentialism, the universal is
derivative from the particular. Does this make sense? To illustrate this for one moment: if
the broadest notion is that of being, being would always have a specific historical
meaning and every universal occurring in any context has this historic[al] particularity or
specificity, which alone makes it a meaningful term. That one could—in a provisional
way, say. But the simple formula would be this: a complete disappearance of the nature
of man. That is the simple difference between existentialism and Plato and Aristotle. One
could then raise this question: Did not the nature of man also disappear from positivism?
That is true, but somehow positivism doesn’t know, hasn’t given any thought to what that
means. And the existentialists, at least the thoughtful existentialists, know what this
means. That will become clearer, I think, when we study the first book of the Laws. There
we will see the difference10 [from] any particularly modern approach immediately. And
with this remark I ask Mr. Kendrick to read his paper on that book. iv
LS: —good, but that is a sign that they are not really good. The first-rate states will
always be characterized by this will to lord it over others, the will to empire. 11 Does
Socrates meet it, and if he does, how?v Clinias, the Cretan, says: that is the nature of civil
society; there is an undeclared war between all states. And everything else is foolish. Let
us be hardheaded. Is Socrates hardheaded?
Student: Sure, he points out that it may well be that those who conquer may not be best.
LS: One could easily say that they will be licked; they may be very fine men in their way
but they will be the slaves of the others who win the war. Is not winning the war the
condition of everything? How would you have gotten freedom in the world if some
peoples had not won revolutionary wars? What would have happened if Britain had won
the war, and so on. Is Socrates hardheaded enough? How does he argue?
iv

Mr. Kendrick read his paper. The reading was not recorded. The recording resumes after
Strauss has begun his remarks on the paper.
v
Socrates is of course nowhere mentioned in the Laws by name. Later in this session, Strauss
corrects himself after referring to the Athenian Stranger as Socrates.

61

Student: Well, he struck me as not taking it on that level but rather taking it to another
dimension and arguing with it there.
LS: Yes, but that is popularly called not meeting the issue.
Student: But in doing that he may meet the issue.
LS: How? We come to that. How does he argue?
Student: I think he most directly argues that since a larger state may defeat a smaller one
and the smaller is better, that the goodness is the major concern. And if you relate that to
his argument in the Apology that the evil man or the evil person can do no harm to a good
person, you have the same thing.
LS: But you underestimate this enemy. He would question this distinction between good
and bad. He would say that is a superficial distinction. The deeper one is the power that
exists in the survival of that society.
Student: I think he words it as follows. Obviously a victory [not] in the worst kind of
war [but in] the best kind of war is the best sort of victory. And then everyone agrees that
civil war is worse than foreign war.
LS: The power politicians, the real ones would admit that. But would they argue that we
must have domestic peace, we must have conquered among the citizens, otherwise we
won’t win wars? But the real payoff is not the conquering but the winning of the war, the
next war.
Student: But it seems to me that he is trying to say this. Okay, make this the principle,
this imperialism, but if that is the thoroughgoing principle, then you have no security
against civil war.
LS: Oh, no. What is Socrates’s argument? Let us never forget that. Socrates says [that]
what is true of the polis is true of the individual.vi And this the opponents would deny.
They would say the conclusion from the goal of the city to the goal of the individual is
not valid. That is the decisive point. The opposite position is this: of course you must
have a community which is 12 able to wage war and [has] all the moral qualities needed
for that, such as concord, justice, and so on. They are of course necessary. But they are
necessary for the purpose of conquest. The key issue is, I think, whether—as Plato and
Aristotle contend—the goal of the individual and the goal of the city are fundamentally
identical, and then13 [Socrates’s claim] follows, or whether they are different. And then
[if they are different], a further argument is needed. We would have to see how he brings
this about. So we must go into that and keep this in mind: whether he really meets that
issue. That is of course the difficulty in every dialogue and also the charm: that Clinias,
who is not terribly trained in these methods, gives in too early, in a way. For example,
vi

Laws 626c-d.

62
when Socrates says, “Then it would apply to the villages and not only to the cities,”
Clinias answers, “Of course.” And Socrates says, “And it would apply to the
individuals?” “Yes. Sure, even to the individual in himself.” “What do you mean, 14 you
strange fellow?” “Yes, don’t we praise a man who defeats, who conquers himself?”vii So,
war all around. War is the law of life. And the issue is not met at this point; it is met in
some way, I admit that, but it is not met explicitly. We have to enucleate that.
Now to come to your other remarks, I can only say that it makes very much sense what
you say, i.e., the movement from war to peace, from courage to moderation, from hearing
to seeing, from public to private. And your remark was especially good that the divine
goods, meaning the virtues, are here somehow presented as being in the service of the
human goods, meaning the bodily goods. And this creates a difficulty. Are these truly the
divine goods, if they are in the service of the human goods? That is a very important
question which we must not, in any circumstances, forget.
The only point where I particularly disagreed with you concerns the remarks you made
about apoblepein, to look away. But that means always, or almost always, to look away
from-toward. And therefore, when Plato speaks of the looking toward the ideal, he very
frequently calls this apoblepein. The point is this, which Mr. Kendrick made. For certain
purposes, it is perfectly sufficient to look at the nature of the territory, for example, in
order to decide the question whether this is good for infantry or cavalry; but for deeper
considerations you have to look away from the territory, because that is a secondary
consideration. But “looking away from” doesn’t mean [looking] into nothing but toward
something, and it may very well be toward the most important things. That is the only
point. Now let us turn then to a coherent discussion of the first book. We shall not finish
it today, but we have the opportunity to consider it again next time.
Now let us begin at the title. The title of the book is Laws. Now most Platonic books, as
you know, have names of human beings as their titles. Titles of this kind are very rare.
But there is one other book, which is particularly pertinent, which also has such a title.
Which is that book?
Student: The Republic.
LS: The Republic, which in Greek is politeia. Now politeia and nomos: I translate nomos
by law and politeia by regime, but that doesn’t make any great difference. These titles
suggest the following situation. The backbone, the primary, is the politeia, the regime—
and with a view to the regime15 you make the laws. To take a simple case, the regime is a
democracy; then the good laws in a democracy will be laws conducive to democracy.
You can easily see what this means if you think of consumer taxes, inheritance taxes,
progressive income taxes and such nice things, education, and so on. So the laws which
are of any interest are political in the sense that they have a reference to the regime. There
are also purely technical laws, for example, regarding typhus and such matters, which
would probably remain unchanged whatever the regime might be. For example, irrigation
systems and so on, but these are not politically interesting. The politically interesting
vii

Law 626c-e. Strauss’s loose paraphrase.

63
laws are all political, meaning they have something to do with the promotion of the
regime, with the furtherance of the regime. We find in Cicero, for example, if I remember
well, a suggestion to this effect, as regards the relation of the two books. The Laws deal
with the laws pertaining to the regime given in the Republic. Now that is surely true of
Cicero’s Laws and Cicero’s Republic, but not of Plato’s. In Plato’s case the relation is
more complicated, and we must see later perhaps why this book is called Laws in
contradistinction to the regime of the Republic.
The Laws are the only Platonic dialogue without Socrates, as you know. The chief
speaker is a man called the Athenian Stranger. Why this is so perhaps we can find out in
a slight[ly] roundabout way. The Laws is the only Platonic dialogue which begins with
the word “god.” God is mentioned in the first question raised by the Athenian and then
twice repeated by Clinias. And some people in the past thought that this was one of the
intimations in pagan literature16 [of the] trinity. I don’t know whether you have heard
that. Now this is of course extremely unlikely, and we can omit that. It is not theoretically
impossible, but it is not something on which one could base any interpretation. Why is
the Laws the only Platonic book beginning with god, with the word “god”? It is a strange
but a necessary question, because it is very striking. Most dialogues begin with rather
insignificant words, although not all. What is the beginning of the Gorgias?
Student: Polemou.
LS: You are right. That is a good beginning. War. But sometimes they begin simply with
a particle, and not with any interesting word. But here is the most powerful word of the
human language. How does one proceed here? I mean, if you tried to clarify that without
speculation, empirically. Assuming as a fact, and I am willing to vouch for that, that [this
is] the only Platonic dialogue which begins with “god,” what is the alternative?
Student: The end.
LS: Is there any one which . . .
Student: The Apology.
LS: The Apology of Socrates is the only dialogue which ends with God. Now could there
be a particular connection between the Apology of Socrates and the Laws? The first
question.
Student: Oracles.
LS: Yes, but do oracles play such a particular role in the Laws?
Student: Well, they are the basis of both the Cretan and the Spartan legislation.
LS: I see. That is not a bad point.

64
Student: According to the oracles from that one—according to Homer, as you say.
LS: Very good. That is a good point. I didn’t think of that. But there is another one which
struck me more immediately. The Apology deals with Socrates’s alleged crime. The
crime, according to the Apology, consisted in impiety, because there was a law making
impiety a capital offense in Athens. In the tenth book we will come across legislation
regarding impiety. The tenth book is known in certain wide circles as a horrible
document responsible for the institution of the inquisition in the Western world. 17 They
say [that] because there is clearly something like—there are certain religious crimes
which are capital crimes in the Laws too. The interesting question would be this: What is
the relation of the impiety crime in the Laws to the impiety crime as existing in Athens?
Permit me to say only this thing. In Athens, the capital crime consisted in denying the
gods of popular belief; in Plato’s Laws, the crime consists in denying gods whose
existence can be demonstrated, a natural theology. That makes somewhat of a difference.
In other words, Socrates would not have been condemned to death in the city of the Laws.
That is one point.
Now after we have gone so far, let us take a further step. Now I say again as a matter of
fact that there are two Platonic dialogues the second to last word of which is “god”; there
is no dialogue in which the second to the first word is “god.” And these are the Laches
and the Crito. Now the Laches is fairly simple. What is the subject of the Laches?
Courage, manliness, and that is obviously very pertinent to this Cretan–Spartan
atmosphere here—courage, you know, being the guiding virtue. We can leave it at that.
The Crito is much more interesting. The Crito is a dialogue in which Socrates is
confronted with the proposition to escape from prison. There is a long deliberation about
that, and a crucial part of this deliberation has this form: If I were to escape from Athens,
and if I were to go where you, Crito, tell me to go, namely, to Thessaly, then18 [there] are
savages there—very wild people—and I wouldn’t feel happy at all. Or if I would go to a
lawabiding city, such as Megara, for example, then everyone would know me and I
would be regarded as a fugitive from justice, and that is also not good. Now you see that
that is an incomplete distinction. There are either cities in which he could live safely,
from the point of view of his reputation, but they are lawless, faraway, or there are cities
nearby and lawabiding, and then the very nearness would create a problem. The question
is: Could there not be somewhere a lawabiding city far away?
In other words, the Laws, I suggest, is based on the jocular but not completely irrelevant
premise: What would Socrates have done if he would have been compelled to flee from
Athens? You mustn’t forget the following point. Socrates does not simply state in the
Crito that it is a categoric[al] imperative that you have to undergo punishment which you
regard as unjust. That is suggested but not said. Here is a real deliberation, and one part
of the deliberation is the age of Socrates: he is seventy. What would have been the
situation if Socrates had been forty? We can disregard these subtle subquestions, i.e.,
should he have fled before the trial? What did Plato do when he was in certain trouble?
He also left and went to Megara and such places. So it is by no means a foregone
conclusion and by no means a moral necessity for men like Socrates to stay in Athens
with the prospect of being condemned to death. Under some circumstances that is the

65
wise thing to do; under other circumstances it is not. It is a prudential decision, not a
simple moral decision, i.e., the simple application of an unchangeable law. One can state
the alternative as follows: What was wiser under the conditions when Socrates was
seventy: to sacrifice his life so that the Athenians should get a bad conscience, and the
whole position of the Athenians changed so that Plato’s academy and Aristotle’s lyceum
would become possible later; or should he go away to a faraway country in order to sow
there certain seeds of civilization which might grow up later? So I think it makes sense to
consider this connection. Of course I know the classical scholars today would say that is
impossible, because we know the Crito was written very early and the Laws were written
very late. But who can know how Plato worked, whether he did not know when he was
thirty or forty that when he was sixty or seventy, or maybe seventy-five, he would write
the Laws?19 Is it not imaginable that someone says, A certain subject can be properly
treated only if you are old, and therefore I will not write it or begin to write it until I am
old? We must not take the experience we have of these present-day writers to apply that
to a man like Plato.
The dialogue begins, then, with this question: “Are your laws of divine origin or of
human origin?” And Clinias says: “Of divine, of gods, of course, at least if we are asked
to say what is most just.”viii He doesn’t say “what is most correct.” The [following]
sentence is also very elliptical, as you see: “For with us, Zeus, and with the
Lacedamonians, I believe they say it is Apollo.”ix There is no predicate to this “with us,
Zeus.”20 Whether the Cretans say it is Zeus or whether Zeus is the legislator does make a
difference. That question is left open. And then Socrates—excuse me, the Athenian
Stranger . . . By the way, let me mention in passing, although this doesn’t prove anything,
that when Aristotle discusses the Laws in the second book of the Politics, he calls our
man Socrates. I admit that doesn’t prove it, but at least we [should] keep this in mind.
The Athenian raises then this question immediately afterward, which properly translated
would mean, “You do not mean to say . . . ”—you expect the negative answer when you
say that—“You do not mean to say according to Homer that Minos (and so on) did these
things.”x
It is a Cretan assertion that these laws stem from Zeus. Then the Athenian rephrases the
question without mentioning Zeus, as you have seen. He speaks of the father, xi which
however, can be no one else but Zeus. There is no remark made about Minos’s justice
here. The Cretan, Clinias, praises Rhadamantus’s justice; he doesn’t say a word about
Minos’s justice. So we have the bare assertion that Minos, of whose moral and
intellectual qualities we know absolutely nothing, is said to have given the laws to their
city, to the Cretans. We are confronted with that, and there is an agreement between the
Cretan stories and Homer, what Homer says. And Homer is of course a poet and poets do
not necessarily convey the historical truth. In the sequel, in the first speech of the
Athenian, the Athenian defines for the first time the subject matter, and this is said to be
here the regime and the nomos, the laws. In other words, it is not limited to laws. That
viii

Laws 624a. Strauss’s translation.
Laws 624a. Strauss’s translation.
x
Laws 624a-b. Strauss’s translation.
xi
Laws 624b.
ix

66
goes without saying. And also the setting is described. They walk from a Cretan city
called Cnosus to the cave and temple of Zeus. What does this mean? This is not merely
because Plato wanted [us] to have some ornament, [some flowers on our way, lest we
lazy people, would not wish to read a treatise on law].21 That has a very important
meaning in the dialogue.
Student: Well, it could mean two things. It could mean that they are repeating the
journey of Minos according to Homer’s account, on the one hand, and on the other hand
it might—thinking of book 7 of the Republic—sum up that kind of endeavor.
LS: They go down to a cave. Yes, but still it is a cave of Zeus, a special cave. Let us not
apply to it what is true of the cave in general. I would bring out what you mean in a
slightly different way. But first let us hear this other question.
Student: Well, I was going to say that what it suggests to me is perhaps that they are
going from the, you might say, hustle and bustle of the city, opinions, and so on, toward
the enlightenment of the best.
LS: That is, I think, the most simple suggestion. But still, they go up to the sources or the
source of the law, which is supposed to be here a very wonderful and good law to begin
with. In other words, they try to reach perfect clarity, the clarity which they could not
reach while remaining in the derivative, in the city, in the lowlands, so to speak. Yes, that
is very good. But then we get another [piece of] information: it is hot. Later on it will
prove to be the longest day of the year. Now what do you do on a hot day?
Student: Look for shade.
LS: Look for shade—in other words, for the absence of the sun, relative absence, for
non-light. That’s it. So we won’t get perfect clarity! That will be mitigated. The desire for
clarity is here mitigated from the very beginning by a desire for nonclarity. We must not
forget that. I cannot possibly go into this question. Perhaps occasionally, when it is
particularly striking. But that I think is also not brought out by this translation. The name
of the Athenian never occurs. He is always addressed as “Stranger.” A fellow called
Taylor, a very famous British classical scholar, has such expressions as “Sir” or “My
good sir,” which, while very British, leave something lacking. The interesting point is
that it has a meaning when Clinias says “You, Stranger,” namely, when the Stranger, by
an utterance of his, reminds 22 [Clinias] of the fact that he is a stranger. But this is only in
passing.
And now the first substantive question is raised. It concerns three subjects. The Athenian
is interested in the Cretan divine legislation, and three subjects strike him most: the
common meals, the gymnasia, and their military equipment, xii which deviate from that of
other cities. Clinias answers his question in a fairly long speech, in which he answers two
questions, the questions regarding the military equipment and the common meals. He
doesn’t explain the gymnasia. But just to show how these little things are done, that will
xii

Laws 625c.

67
come out only in the Greek. If you turn to 626b5, the Athenian in his answer says: “You
seem to be well trained (gegumnasthai) 23[in] the understanding of the usages of the
Cretans.” You see, the Greek word which we translate “training,” gumnasein, or
gymnasion, is the training place meant originally. What is the root of that?
Student: gumnos, naked.
LS: Naked. To strip. Of course you strip for training. But it has for this reason also the
other meaning, and therefore in some countries of the world high schools are called
gymnasia—and in Plato somewhere the Pythagorean school is called a gymnasium. There
can be a training and stripping of the mind. This stripping of the mind takes place not
only in examinations, where it is the idea of an examination, i.e., that someone be
examined to see what his mind looks like without any disguises, without any artificial
helps of any sort. Now what is then the answer of Clinias? We have heard this. In Crete
everything is organized with a view to war, for there is always war of all men throughout
life, continuous, against all cities. But it appears that this is a war not primarily of
everyone but primarily of city against city. This is stated in a repetition in the same
context: this war is according to nature. And the question concerns, then, throughout the
first book and beyond: What is according to nature? The two opposite views appeal
equally to nature; that is the common ground. And the question is, of course, who has the
proper understanding of nature24—these people who say war is the fundamental
phenomenon, or those who deny that? Then Socrates discusses this argument, this
proposition, in the following way. If war is really the universal phenomenon, it must be
found on all levels. Not only on the level of city versus city, but ultimately even on the
level of individual versus individual, and even within the individual himself. The
individual must be characterized by conflict. And Clinias accepts this and says: Yes, for
do we not praise people who control themselves, who vanquish themselves? And this is
even regarded as the first and best victory. You see, what happens is this: Clinias
succeeds in formally preserving his thesis—universality of conflict—but in fact he
changes the thesis, because self-control as distinguished from licking others becomes an
important consideration. So without knowing it, he makes a transition from mere courage
to self-control, temperance, moderation. He is not aware of that. Now25 [in] a somewhat
later passage the subject matter is still more precisely defined (627c8 to d7). Will you
read that?26
Reader:
[Ath.:] And moreover, it would ill beseem you and me to go a-chasing after this form of
expression, that if the bad ones conquered the whole of this family and house, [they]
should be called “self-inferior,” but “self-superior” if they were defeated; for our present
reference to the usage of ordinary speech is not concerned with the propriety or
impropriety of verbal phrases but with the essential rightness or error concerning laws. xiii
(627c-d)
LS: Why does he say “essential”?
xiii

In the Loeb: “wrongness” for “error.”

68
Student: Well, he leaves out “whatever it is by nature.”
LS: That is the terrible idiocy of these translators. They completely destroy the meaning:
“is concerned with the correctness and mistakenness of laws, what it is according to
nature.” This is a reference back to a remark where Clinias had appealed from the mere
words—men talk all the time of peace and that is nothing; the real thing is war—he had
appealed from the words to what is, to nature. And the Athenian Stranger takes it up:
“Indeed, we are not concerned with words here; we are concerned with nature.” And the
question which we raise regarding laws concerns what is the natural difference, the
natural standard for laws, by virtue of which we can distinguish nonarbitrarily between
good laws and bad laws. That is the theme of this book, of the whole book in a way. The
whole book tries to elaborate these natural standards. In the sequel (the next longer
speech) there is a difficulty of some importance. To see the background: there is enmity
among brothers and we look for an arbiter or judge.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Which of the two would be the better—a judge who destroyed all the wicked
among them and charged the good to govern themselves, or one who made the good
members govern and, while allowing the bad to live, made them submit willingly to be
governed? And there is a third judge we must mention (third and best in point of
virtue)—xiv (627d-e)
LS: What does he say? Third in point of virtue, third with a view to virtue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] if indeed such a judge can be found,—who in dealing with a single divided family
will destroy none of them but reconcile them and succeed, by enacting laws for them, in
securing amongst them thenceforward permanent friendliness. (627e-628a)
LS: All right, this is the third best—[he] who establishes law. Why is it the third, and
what is the difference between him and the second?
Student: Well, the third is the lawgiver.
LS: But the third best only. What about the second best? What does he do?
Student: It makes the worse willingly submit to the rule of the better.
LS: But that is not quite clear. Please make it quite clear what is implied about the third.
The third is rule of laws, but not the rule of the good ones. In other words, under the rule
of laws the good and bad ones have equal opportunity, provided they remain within the
laws. And what about the first? If we follow the external order, what would be the first?
Student: To get rid of the bad ones entirely.
xiv

In the Loeb: “in point of merit” for “in point of virtue.”

69
LS: Yes, he destroys them. That seems to be atrocious, but let us not be rash; let us
consider it for one moment. What would be the advantage of this possibility mentioned in
the first place?
Student: To start over.
LS: No.
Student: But in the Republic . . .
LS: The complete absence of bad ones. Would this not be the best? I mean, the best
solution would be a society consisting only of good men. Failing that, a society in which
the good rule the bad. Failing that, a state in which the law rules the good and bad
equally, and gives the good ones some edge.
Student: [. . .]
LS: I see. Then we would reach this very strange conclusion that Plato inverted the order:
the third remains the last, the most inferior, but27 the highest is at the center. I would not
be shocked by that.
Student: The first possesses theoretical perfection, but calls for . . .
LS: Yes, sure. Who should obey, who should do the dirty work?
Student: I don’t know. Perhaps in the third one listed here the judge who reconciles them
and who is best from the point of view of virtue, is therefore first in the order of merit and
virtue. And why is he first? Because in instituting laws for these people, he has in a sense
made the bad ones good.
LS: Yes, but he said the third with a view to virtue.
Student: Then there is a mistranslation. He says “third and best in point of merit.”
LS: The thought is strange, and the simplest thing to do is to dispose of the strangeness
by your translation. That is true, but it is of no help. No, no, I think we have to take this
literally. And there is so much evidence to support that view in other Platonic dialogues
to see that it is not strange from Plato’s point of view; it is strange from the translator’s
point of view.
Student: Is this indication of the three arrangements somewhat analogous to the ranking
of the Republic, the Statesman, and the Laws?
LS: Sure, there is something to that. And there are statements in the Laws which are as
harsh as this one; you know, cutting off. Plato doesn’t go beyond that, if I remember well.
Theoretically one must admit that a society in which there are only good men is much

70
preferable to one in which there are also bad men. But since this is—xv —Now what does
this mean? We have to understand that. We have seen in the argument which we have not
read now, that precisely since self-control, the victory of the individual over himself, is so
important, and connected with this, that peace is higher than war, the true aim of the
legislator would not be war but peace: meaning not the use of the individual for winning
wars but to build up the individual in himself as a good human being. But from this point
of view, what would follow? Well, it would be too bad for Sparta and Crete of course,
because, as we know, as we have heard from the horse’s own mouth, these laws are
directed toward war only. Consider for one moment the situation. An anonymous
stranger, an old man as we shall see later, has arrived in Crete, and then he has a
conversation about what is nearest and dearest and most sacred to the Cretans, namely,
their laws. And within a very short time—even if they speak very slowly, about twenty
minutes, I guess—they reach this conclusion that the laws of Crete are fundamentally
rotten because their goal, end, is not the true end. It is a very difficult situation for both
sides, assuming some delicacy. And here we find the first reaction already. Now what
does the Athenian now do?
Student: He takes up the poets.
LS: Why does he do that?
Student: Well, it is kind of neutral or common ground.
LS: In other words, he takes a substitute enemy. Let us assume that Minos is his
enemy—I mean, not on low grounds. Minos is the real opponent with his false principle;
and Lycurgus, too. Then he takes a substitute enemy, and the substitute enemy is the
poet, a man without authority. In addition, this particular man, Tyrtaeus, was, as he
stresses, an Athenian by birth. So he remains within his home territory and doesn’t enter
territory where he has no rights. But indeed he became a Spartan and he was the great
praiser of courage in war and of the warrior. So we do not attack 28 Minos and Lycurgus
[anymore], but we attack this fellow citizen of ours, Tyrtaeus, who however became an
expatriate in Sparta. And who do we bring in? Because he will not even attack Tyrtaeus
in his own name, he brings in another poet. You can beat a poet only by a poet.
Differently stated, he is a witness, an authority, and an authority cannot be fought except
by a counterauthority. And that is another poet, Theognis. And where does he come
from?
Student: From Sicily.
LS: Yes, from Sicilian Megara. Megara was very well known as an enemy of Athens;
you know, a city close to Athens. The Peloponnesian War started because of that
Megaran affair. So it reminds us a bit of that enemy of Athens, but it is not that real
enemy; it is that Sicilian Megara, which is something far away. So first there is a fight
between one poet, Theognis, who praises virtue complete and not merely the virtue which
every hoodlum and every storm trooper possesses. Using somewhat different terms, 29
xv

There was a break in the tape at this point.

71
[the Athenian] says mercenary soldiers. That is a thing which is not highly to be praised.
Now in this connection he gives the first statement about the standards. 630c, at the end
of the speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Plainly it is this: both the Heaven-taught legislator of Crete and every legislator
who is worth his salt will most assuredly legislate always with a single eye to the highest
goodness and to that alone; and this (to quote Theognis) consists in “loyalty in danger,”
and one might term it “complete righteousness.” But that goodness which Tyrtaeus
specially praised, fair though it be and fitly glorified by the poet, deserves nevertheless to
be placed no higher than fourth in order and power.xvi (630b-c)
LS: Now we get here the first notion, although the term nature is not here used, of this
natural standard. There is a hierarchy, a natural hierarchy, of the virtues. The highest
place is occupied by complete virtue, as he calls it, by complete justice. And courage has
the lowest place. What are two and three?
Student: Moderation.
LS: Temperance and moderation are the same. I believe that prudence, practical wisdom,
has a higher place. No, no. Moderation and then prudence. Does this remind you of
something? Courage, moderation, and at the top, complete justice: Nicomachean Ethics.
In the Ethics Aristotle begins with courage, goes over to moderation, and then [to] the
moral virtues, and [ends] with complete justice, the all-embracing social virtue. And then
Aristotle brings in the intellectual virtues, among which prudence is one, later. But
Aristotle here simply follows the Platonic fundamental conception. So that is now the
standard. Of course that is not proven here. What does he do? He quotes certain verses
from Theognis. Now if you understand these verses, you are reminded of certain things
which you have observed also on other occasions, and thought out. And if you articulate
that, then you have the proof which is possible here. The proof is not explicitly given.
Student: I was just wondering. This isn’t quite the same as Aristotle’s.
LS: Not quite the same, but it is akin.
Student: I was confused because Aristotle distinguishes between this complete justice
and the narrow sense of justice, and also he would—although I am not quite sure of this,
some would say that complete justice or all the virtues in combination is the crowning
virtue.
LS: So would Aristotle himself.
Student: [Of] which prudence is in a sense the sum, because . . .

xvi

In the Loeb: “fourth in order and estimation” for “fourth in order and power.”

72
LS: Yes, that is made clear—that in Aristotle’s view prudence enters everywhere. But
Plato takes here a much cruder view. He understands by courage something which
Aristotle would never admit to be courage. I mean, that which the mercenary soldier or
the hoodlum has is not courage. Strictly speaking, it is a kind of courage, or rather an
[appearance] of courage, a reflection of courage. Still, it is nevertheless important for the
understanding of Aristotle’s Ethics that the sequence of the virtues there is not arbitrary.
Justice in the wider sense, as Aristotle I believe calls it, is the social virtue, that is to say,
the virtue which embraces all other virtues insofar as they refer to the others. Justice in
the narrower sense has to do with distribution and commutation—I mean, with mine and
thine on all levels. Nevertheless, one could say from Aristotle’s point of view that justice
in the narrower sense is a higher virtue than courage and temperance. Why?
Student: It needs other people to practice it on, whereas you can be temperate alone.
LS: No, that is another question. A very important question, and Aristotle would say that
ultimately the virtues are inseparable if they are understood in their full sense. But I think
the notion guiding the Aristotelian order is the intellectuality of the virtues. Now justice,
not in simple cases—whether one should snatch a purse or not—but in more complicated
cases as the judge especially must practice, is of course a more intellectual virtue than
courage and temperance. So that would not be totally alien to Plato, although it is not the
same.
Now to repeat, this is the standard: complete justice at the top and courage at the bottom.
But Plato speaks here very popularly. This is courage in the vulgar sense, not in any
refined sense. Now what is the consequence from this regarding Crete or Sparta? You
know there is a Spartan present who is very reticent. Spartans were known to be laconic,
and as long as possible he leaves it at “yes” and “no.” But later on, he is simply dragged
in because his national honor is at stake. Sparta is attacked, and then he must of course
talk. But he is very reticent, whereas the Cretan is a much glibber fellow and much less
solid and sturdy and reliable. The Cretans were known in classical antiquity for being
liars. You know that plays a great role in logic. A Cretan says all Cretans are liars. That
leads to a certain difficulty. If he is a liar, then the statement too is wrong, and so on. That
has been frequently discussed.
But to come back. Both Crete and Sparta are under attack. What does Clinias say here
(630d, near the beginning)? “Oh, Stranger, we throw our legislator away into the remote
legislators.”xvii Which means, we throw him into the farthest corner; he is a very poor
legislator. What does the Athenian say, in his niceness?
Reader:
[Ath.:] Not so, my good sir,xviii it is ourselves we are degrading, in so far as we imagine
that it was with a special view to war that Lycurgus and Minos laid down all the legal
usages here and in Lacedaemon. (630d)
xvii
xviii

Laws 630d. Strauss’s translation.
In the Loeb: “Nay, my good Sir”

73
LS: So in other words, what is said is that no criticism is implied. But why not? Why
not? We have been told the aim of Crete and Sparta is war, and we have learned that this
is a very poor legislation which doesn’t go beyond war and courage. And so on.
Student: Well, he is saying then that Clinias and Megillus don’t know what they are
talking about. Really the laws are okay. but their interpretation of the laws is wrong.
LS: So in other words, he appeals from an interpretation of the laws to the true meaning
of the laws?
Student: And he switches then from degrading the lawgiver to degrading Clinias and
Megillus, and that is a lesser thing.
LS: That is so. In other words, we come now to a question which in Mr. Mahdi’s xix
language would be called [hermeneutic], a question of interpretation. We have to
discover the deeper meaning of these laws, the idea being that these laws are god-given
and therefore they must be good. And if they appear to be bad, that is only the appearance
and we have to dig deeper. And now Clinias doesn’t know how to do that, as the next
question says: “How then must we speak?”
Reader:
[Ath.:] In the way that is, as I think, true and proper when talking of a divine hero. That is
to say, we should state that he enacted laws with an eye not to some one fraction, and that
the most paltry, of goodness, but to goodness as a whole, and that he devised the laws
themselves according to classes, though not the classes which the present devisers
propound. For everyone now brings forward and devises just the class which he needs:
one man deals with inheritances and heiresses, another with cases of battery, and so on in
endless variety. But what we assert is that the devising of laws, when rightly conducted,
follows the procedure which we have now commenced. Indeed, I greatly admire the way
you opened your exposition of the laws; for to make a start with goodness and say that
was the aim of the lawgiver is the right way. (630d-631a)
LS: Of course. That is already a polite improvement on Clinias. By implication 30 when
he said war he said the virtue of war also, but he didn’t do it explicitly.
Reader:
[Ath.:] But in your further statement that he legislated wholly with reference to a fraction
of goodness, and that the smallest fraction, you seemed to me to be in error, and all this
latter part of my discourse was because of that. What then is the manner of exposition I
should have liked to have have heard from you? Shall I tell you? (631a-b)
LS: Now before we turn to the next passage, let us understand this one thing. The subject
matter is laws and the regime, or rather the regime and the laws. But it is also defined [as]
the natural principles of rightness or wrongness of laws. And what does that mean, the
xix

Muhsin Mahdi (1926-2007), a scholar of Arabic and Islamic history, philology and philosophy.
A student of Strauss’s, Mahdi received his Ph.D. from the University of Chicago in 1954.

74
natural principles of the rightness or wrongness of laws? We get now some notion what
that is. What is the point of view in the light of which we have to consider laws?
Student: Virtue.
LS: Virtue. Since this word is today disliked by many people or unknown to them, for
that matter, let us say first human beings, the quality of human beings which the law
fosters. That is the decisive consideration, and all laws which have no direct relation to
that are bound to be secondary or tertiary in importance, and can only be judged
ultimately with a view to these guiding things. The function of the legislator is to make or
to produce, as far as possible, good men. That is axiomatic for Plato as well as for
Aristotle. Now we have to get the more specific definition in the following speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “Oh, Stranger” (thus you ought to have said)—
LS: You see, now he turns into Clinias. How a properly trained Clinias, a Clinias who
had been brought up in Athens in the proper surroundings, would have spoken.
Reader:
“it is not for nothing that the laws of the Cretans are held in superlatively high repute
among all the Hellenes. For they are true laws inasmuch as they effect the well-being of
those who use them by supplying all things that are good. Now goods are of two kinds,
human and divine; and the human goods are dependent on the divine, and he who
receives the greater acquires also the less, or else he is bereft of both.” (631b-c)
LS: No, the city, the city which acquires the greater. But let us not quarrel about that.
Reader:
“The lesser goods are those of which health ranks first, beauty second; the third is
strength, in running and all other bodily exercises; and the fourth is wealth—no blind god
Plutus, but keen of sight, provided that he has wisdom for companion. And wisdom, in
turn, has first place among the goods that are divine—” (631c)
LS: Practical wisdom.
Reader:
[Ath.:]
“and this is a moderate . . . of soul—”—xx (631c)
LS: No, that is badly translated, I would say.
Student: He says “rational temperance,” but I . . .
xx

In the Loeb: “and rational temperance of soul comes second.” Perhaps the student was trying to
translate from the Greek himself.

75
LS: Well, I would say “the second after intelligence [nous] is a moderate habit of
thought.”
Reader:
“from these two, when united with courage, there issues justice, as the third; and the
fourth is courage. Now all these are by nature ranked before the human goods, and verily
the lawgiver also must so rank them.” (631c-d)
LS: You see, the natural order of the virtues is the standard for the legislator, and one
couldn’t state it more clearly form Plato’s point of view.
Student: One question of translation: why do you translate “after” [in “after intelligence
is a moderate habit of thought”]? Why do you read meta noun?xxi
LS: Because meta noun is the reading of the best manuscript, if I remember. Let me look
it up. That is c7? Yes, the best manuscript and Stobaeus have noun, and nou only in
Eusebius. And let me see what happened in line 6. No, no, that is clear; that is the reading
of the best manuscript. Why should we deviate from it? In other words, what he does,
[and what has disconcerted them], is this:31 that he tacitly identifies here phronēsis, which
is usually translated [as] practical wisdom, with nous (intelligence), which of course is
possible in such a provisional discussion. But let us consider that for one moment. We
have a change now of order. We have now at the top practical wisdom or intelligence,
and then we get moderation, and then we get a mixture of practical wisdom, moderation
and courage—and that is called justice—and then we get courage. That is a nice problem,
to find out how they are related to each other. The only thing which is identical is
courage, here in the fourth place. Why this [LS points to the blackboard] should be lower
in rank than moderation alone is a very hard question. Only in this case, however, does he
say it is a natural order. Here [pointing again] he didn’t say that. That is one of the many
nice problems one has to answer in studying Plato. Now one point one has to consider
here is that there is a parallel regarding the human goods. What are they? This is perfectly
rational: health, beauty, [strength, and wealth]xxii—or is it perfectly rational? That health
should go first I believe everyone would admit. But whether beauty should come prior to
strength could already be argued.
Student: In the Gorgias, beauty comes first.
LS: Still, it is a question. Think of it in practical terms. And that wealth comes last is
perfectly sensible because it is external, it has nothing to do with the body except as an
instrument. So that these two [LS points to the blackboard] should be related makes some
sense if you think of the importance of a certain kind of restlessness in order to get
money. And that the health of the soul should consist in the condition of the mind proper,
whether we call it practical wisdom or whether we call it by another name, also would
xxi

In the Loeb: meta nou (nous in the genitive), which would translate as “with intelligence.”
Strauss indicates a preference for the ms. reading that has nous in the accusative, meta noun,
“after intelligence.”
xxii
The transcript has ellipses here.

76
make sense. This makes a nice question to figure out. It is not easy but I believe it can be
done.
Now there was one more passage. I would like to follow now only the external argument.
We must understand this much. There must be an order of the virtues which guides the
legislator. Now he speaks about the laws. Let us read the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “Next, it must be proclaimed to the citizens that all the other instructions they
receive have these in view; and that, of these goods themselves, the human look up to the
divine, and the divine to intelligence as their leader.”xxiii
LS: You see, that is emphasized: the leader of everything is intelligence of mind. That is
absolutely emphasized, so there can be no ambiguity about that. And now he speaks
about the laws, what the subject matter of the laws is as distinguished from the principles.
Continue.
Reader:
“And in regard to their marriage connections, and to their subsequent breeding and
rearing of children, male and female, both during youth and in later life up to old age, the
lawgiver must supervise the citizens, duly apportioning honour and dishonour; and in
regard to all their forms of intercourse he must observe and watch their pains and
pleasures and desires and all intense passions, and distribute praise and blame correctly
by means of the laws themselves.” (631d-632a)
LS: It32 [says] “praise and blame”? He says blame and praise. But that is only a little
point, that they think these can be changed at will. Now this is the first class of the
subjects of legislation, which begins with marriage, [and] extends then to all love in the
widest sense of the term, we also can say desire, the regulation of desire. Now the next
point.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “Moreover, in the matter of anger and of fear, and of all the disturbances which
befall souls owing to misfortune, and of all the avoidances thereof which occur in goodfortune, and of all the experiences which confront men through disease or war or penury
or their opposites,—in regard to all these definite instruction must be given as to what is
the right and what the wrong disposition in each case.” (632a-b)
LS: No. The key words are the noble and what is not noble [not “the right” and “the
wrong”]. Now up to this point this refers to the first subject matter, the subject matter of
temperance or moderation, then the subject matter of courage, and these are taken
together under the overriding heading, the noble and the base. Now we come to the third.
Reader:
xxiii

In the Loeb: “to reason as their chief” for “to intelligence as their leader.”

77
[Ath.:] “It is necessary, in the next place, for the law-giver to keep a watch on the
methods employed by the citizens in gaining and spending money, and to supervise the
associations they form with one another, and the dissolutions thereof, whether they be
voluntary or under compulsion; he must observe the manner in which they conduct each
of these mutual transactions, and note where justice obtains and where it is lacking.”
LS: Yes, the just and what is not just. Here it is no longer the noble and base but the just
and unjust. Here we deal with justice. Continue.
Reader:
“To those that are obedient he must assign honors by law, but on the disobedient he must
impose duly appointed penalties. Then finally, when he arrives at the completion of the
whole constitution, he has to consider in what manner in each case the burial of the dead
should be carried out, and what honours should be assigned to them.” (632b-c)
LS: Now why is that the end of the regime, the end of the politeia? You see, he began
with birth, with marriage, and he ends with death, because when we die our political
life—politeia can also mean the political life—surely ends. So it follows that the whole
course of life must be covered by legislation. So we have three virtues here: temperance,
courage, justice. And then?
Reader:
[Ath.:] “This being settled, the framer of the laws will hand over all his statutes to the
charge of Wardens—guided some by wisdom, others by true opinion—to the end that
Reason, having bound all into one single system, may declare them to be ancillary neither
to wealth nor ambition, but to temperance and justice.” (632c)
LS: So you see, that is the last word. The nous, intelligence, binds all these things
together as ancillary to moderation and justice. But that has a crucial implication. In this
dimension mind, intelligence, is subservient to moderation and justice or, to use an
Aristotelian term, to moral virtue. That is the difficulty to which you pointed in your
report—that the divine goods are subservient to the human goods. This is repeated on a
higher plane by making the mind subservient to the moral virtues, and that points
therefore to a perfectly adequate solution in which the mind is not subservient to anything
lower than itself, and that would be wisdom.
Student: Here is where he says the so-called laws of Zeus.
LS: In the immediate sequel? Sure, that is quite correct. Now if you read only the end of
this speech, and then we stop.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In this manner, Strangers, I could have wished (and I wish it still) that you had
fully explained how all these regulations are inherent in the reputed laws of Zeus and in
those of the Pythian Apollo which were ordained by Minos and Lycurgus. (632d)

78
LS: Yes, that is all we need. You see, in other words, the legislators were Minos and
Lycurgus; the other is mere claim, unsupported claim, which we can dismiss. And in the
next speech the Athenian Stranger says: We have now disposed silently of the claim to
[the] divinity of these laws, and we begin now with the serious question of what the
standards of legislation are, which have been sketched up to now. But let us keep this
point in mind. That is so easy to overlook, and you see how it happens—you have seen it
with your own eyes. It is primarily the fault of the translators, who speak of essential
rightness where Plato says rightness according to nature. That they do all the time. And
therefore the whole discussion whether Plato was a teacher of natural right or not is
usually decided in the negative, not merely because of the translations but because of the
mind of the translator, the prejudices with which the translators comply in making their
translations. The word “nature” doesn’t make sense to them, and therefore they substitute
another term.
Student: It might be noted that Jowett uses the adjective “natural” in this particular
place.
LS: I’m glad to hear that. As far as the Republic is concerned I always found Shorey’s
translation to be the best. Bury is less satisfactory and Taylor is still less satisfactory. But
you think Jowett is the best for the Laws?
Student: I haven’t gone over it completely, but three or four years ago when I did more
work on it I came to the conclusion that Jowett was the best.
LS: Well, it is a very cheap and in a way unworthy triumph to criticize these translators,
one reason being that it is very hard to do any translation. Those who do not undergo this
terrible hardship are in the position of backseat drivers. That is a bit unfair. But apart
from that, when the word physis occurs in the Greek text it is very easy to translate [it] in
English [as] “nature.”33 But that does not of course guarantee that one understands that.
The translators express, by their wrong translations, the very great difficulty which
modern men have in understanding what Plato means by nature. When Plato speaks of
the idea of justice, that they translate without any difficulty, because the word “idea” has
been recoined by Locke and it has become a very common word in English and the other
modern languages. But that Plato means by the idea of justice exactly the same [as] what
he means by the nature of justice, and when speaking of natural justice, he means the idea
of justice—that is, to begin with, wholly unintelligible. But we can understand it best by
starting from this observation: there is according to Plato a nature of man, and this nature
of man points to its specific perfection. If you know what a man is, you have the decisive
indication as to what a good man is. And that is not an arbitrary value system but it is as
much determined by the nature of man as the goodness of a horse is determined by the
nature of a horse. And that is the indispensable first step one must take in trying to
understand Plato’s doctrine of laws.
Now next time I think we will devote the whole meeting, which is not very much, for a
discussion of the rest of the first book. And if you reread it, and find important difficulties
which are perhaps soluble, bring them up by all means.

79

1

Deleted “then.”
Deleted “was what.”
3
Moved “foreign enemies.”
4
Deleted “he.”
5
Deleted “him.”
6
Deleted “him”
7
Deleted “that.”
8
Deleted “he.”
9
Deleted “on page 419.”
10
Deleted “to.”
11
Deleted “how.”
12
Deleted “capable.”
13
Deleted “it.”
14
Deleted “Socrates.” (Comparing LS’s paraphrase with the text suggests that LS meant to indicate not a
question posed to Socrates, but the question that Socrates posed to Clinias, given in the Loeb as “What do
you mean, my admirable sir?” at 626e1.)
15
Deleted “do.”
16
Deleted “to.”
17
Moved “that.”
18
Deleted “these.”
19
Changed from “will be . . . will write the Laws.”
20
Deleted “whether they say it is Zeus or whether it is Zeus, which is a difference.”
21
Changed from “lest we lazy people, wishing to read a treatise on law, should have some flowers on our
way.”
22
Deleted “his.”
23
Deleted “for.”
24
Deleted “whether.”
25
Deleted “is.”
26
Deleted “page 13, second paragraph.”
27
Deleted “that.”
28
Moved “anymore.”
29
Deleted “he.”
30
Deleted “he did.”
31
Moved “and what has disconcerted them.”
32
Deleted “doesn’t say.”
2

Changed from “it is very easy to translate – when the word physis occurs in the
Greek text – in English nature.”
33

80
Session 4: January 27, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —society which ever existed who left it at saying “We are a
gang of men who have banded together in order to lord it over others, and that is all there
is to it.” That is somehow impossible. The very authority which the city claims in
punishing gangs presupposes that the city is not merely stronger than the gang 1 [or]
gangs, but qualitatively different. That is so. How this has to be ultimately understood is a
long question. But one cannot disregard this fact: this is what they call now a need for
ideology (which is a terrible word and a very misleading word). Gangs do not need
ideologies, if we use this language. This much about the primary argument of the Laws.
So war cannot be the end of civil society; there must be something else.
But what is the general theoretical notion which is used in this analysis? We have seen
that. They are concerned with the natural correctness or wrongness of laws. The standard
“natural,” means here—primarily, although that does not exhaust the meaning—
nonarbitrary. Are there any standards of the correctness or wrongness of laws which are
not arbitrary, which do not themselves depend on arbitrary preferences of individuals or
of societies? Societies are the same thing. If we would say [that] we measure the laws by
the values adopted by our society, then the question arises: What are the bases of the
values of your society? Natural means something which is radically nonarbitrary. And in
the later discussion it appears that this nonarbitrary [something] has to be sought above
all in the quality of human beings, or in virtue. Laws are good to the extent to which they
are productive of good men. That does not literally apply to all laws, but ultimately to all
laws. For example, there are purely technical laws which do not have any direct relation
to the goodness of men. But the interesting laws all have to be viewed in the light of this
ultimate consideration. It is then implied that2 the distinction between virtue and vice and
the meaning of virtue and vice is a natural and nonarbitrary one.
I think the principle is familiar to us. Even today if someone would say the most
important function of laws is to produce, or to be conducive to the being of a nice kind of
men, this would still be sound reasoning. But the difficulty arises because there is a
variety of these good qualities; and the requirements of these different qualities differ,
maybe are opposed. For example, when we speak of goodness, that means decency in the
ordinary sense of the term, without any sophistication. But people praise not only
decency when they speak of human beings, they also praise what they call creativity.
Now not every decent man is creative, and not every creative man, unfortunately, is
decent. These are two different requirements. Also people use as a term of praise “the
intellectuals.” There may be a society of decent men which doesn’t include a single
intellectual, yet the possession of intellectuals is supposed to be a quality of a society.
You can see the difficulty in the famous case of Henry Wallace. i Henry Wallace was very
much concerned with the common man, but his friends, when they wanted to praise him,
didn’t say Henry Wallace is a common man: they said he is an uncommon man. So in
i

Henry Wallace (1888-1965), thirty-third Vice President of the United States (1941-1945),
delivered a speech made famous by the phrase “Century of the Common Man” in May, 1942 to
the Free World Association in New York City.

81
other words, commonness and the quality of common decency is one thing, but it is not
the whole story.
Now this fact that there are various virtues, and virtues the requirements of which
possibly conflict, leads to this notion:3 if there is to be nature in these matters at all, [must
there] not be an order, a hierarchic order, of the virtues? And if there is such an hierarchic
order there must be of course an overriding point of view by virtue of which the
hierarchic order is made. Now this is a subject which we have discussed to some extent
last time, but I think I can state it now a bit more clearly. Now the first statement was
this: that there are four virtues. The first is perfect justice, or complete justice, which
means justice together with moderation together with prudence and courage. Then
[comes] prudence, then moderation, and then courage, or manliness. Here in the first
enumeration (630a to b) it is not quite clear whether this prudence precedes moderation
or vise versa. Then a bit later we get the following scheme, a more detailed scheme, 4 in
631d to e. Only in the second case does the Athenian Stranger explicitly state that this is a
scheme according to nature. There he distinguishes between the human goods and the
divine goods.5 [The human goods] are health, beauty, strength and wealth, in descending
order, of course. And here [as the divine goods] we have prudence or intelligence,
moderation, justice and courage. You see, courage has the same status in both cases, but
otherwise the order is fundamentally changed. Now justice is here defined 6 as prudence
plus moderation plus courage, and that is very strange. That something which should
combine all three other virtues should be lower than two of its elements—prudence and
moderation. That is a great problem, and that is an indication, a very provisional
indication, of the complexity. Now justice is here, we see immediately, demoted in favor
of prudence–intelligence and of moderation, but on the other hand we must say this
justice is no longer called complete justice, or perfect, as it was called in the first
enumeration. Now what does this mean, this demotion of justice? He says the human
goods are directed toward the divine goods. Now that is easy to understand. All goods of
the body, all external goods, are justifiable or interesting ultimately only to the extent to
which they do something to the soul of man. But then he says the divine goods
themselves are directed toward the ruling intelligence. So we see the new order is made
with a view to the fact that the highest that exists is the ruling intelligence. For some
reason which is not stated, not explained here at all, this leads to a demotion of justice. I 7
leave it here only at the statement of the problem.
Let us now turn to the third statement, which is in 631d to 632e. There we find four
virtues, in this order: moderation, courage, justice and prudence. This is easily explained,
because here8 [the Athenian] follows the movement of man from birth to death.
Moderation somehow is the earliest virtue, by which he means that it is the first in the
education of children—even babies are given some education in moderation, for
example, regarding food. Courage comes a bit later. The child must be able to walk
before he can show some rudiments of courage. Justice comes still later, because justice
presupposes already some independence, some property of his own, which a child strictly
speaking does not possess because there is no private property within the family. It is not
normal. And prudence comes still later. So this is no problem, because here he considers
the temporal order, which is not the order of rank. But this is an indication of the

82
complexity of the problem. In ordering the virtues, we have to consider rank as well as
the temporal order and perhaps 9 other things which we do not know yet. Now in this
connection he makes this statement: that intelligence brings all these things together in
the service of moderation and justice. So here we have the ruling intelligence [LS points
to the blackboard]; here he also has the ruling intelligence, but the ruling intelligence
itself is serving moderation and justice. And the name for that activity where intelligence
serves moderation and justice is called education. So from the point of view of education,
the ruling mind is ancillary. But the question is whether the ruling mind is simply
ancillary, whether it is not properly understood as not ancillary to anything else. The
judgment on justice, in particular—the social virtue—will depend on how this question is
decided. We recognize here perhaps the famous quarrel as to whether the practical life or
the theoretical life is higher in rank. If the practical life is higher in rank, justice must
have a very high status, the highest status, because action is always, in its full form,
action with other men or directed toward other men. But if the theoretical life is highest
the opposite conclusion will follow. And we will come across this question later on.
I think I can leave it at these remarks. In these first remarks about the hierarchy of
virtues, Plato indicates the complexity of the problem. Somehow there must be a natural
order, but whether that natural order is so easily accessible, whether there is not a variety
of considerations, that we do not yet know. I would like to add one more point. When he
speaks of the divine goods, the virtues, as distinguished from the human goods—the
goods of the body and the external goods—he says the divine goods are the necessary
and sufficient condition of the human goods. What do you say to this proposition that the
virtues are the necessary and sufficient condition of health, beauty, strength and wealth?
That they are a necessary condition makes some sense. For example, if you want to
preserve wealth you need some virtue. Perhaps not a very high virtue, but you cannot be a
complete bum; otherwise you will lose your wealth very soon.
Student: Well, nature seems to play a role in the human goods as well, so that the virtues
would not be a sufficient condition.
LS: Could not be. But how would we then judge this statement that virtue is the
necessary and sufficient condition of the goods of the body and of the external goods?
Student: It is wrong.
LS: Very good. One couldn’t be clearer. But there are all kinds of wrong statements.
There are wrong statements which are simply foolish, and there are wrong statements
which are nevertheless respectable, in spite of being wrong. And there is a simple word
for that in Plato’s language: a myth. In other words, a myth means a salutary lie in this
connection. I draw your attention to the fact because the term myth is frequently applied
throughout this book to what they are doing, the legislating activity. It seems that the
legislating activity is not possible without certain fictions. Now this should not be
surprising to us, for we have studied the Minos, and there we have seen that the law as
such is based on a disregard of very pertinent facts for the sake of social convenience. A
statement disregarding complexities which are very relevant is as such a wrong

83
statement.10 If you disregard irrelevant things, you make a genuine and legitimate
abstraction; but if you disregard relevant things, then your statement is wrong. It can still
be useful.
Student: There was one thing that occurred to me in reading that. That is, if these are the
virtues of a lawgiver, in a sense the lawgiver makes possible the development of the
minor human virtues as they are here. A gang of robbers, for example, would not
cultivate their beauty, although they might cultivate their wealth.
LS: I think you are mistaken. I know very much about that because I look frequently at
the TV, which I take to be a realistic statement of gangster life. I may be mistaken, but I
had the feeling that while the end, namely, their defeat, is unfortunately miserable, what
they say about the taste of the gangsters makes sense. Now they are very much concerned
with certain beings whom they call “molls.” ii And with a view to these they are very
much concerned with whether the moll is beautiful and whether they are beautiful in the
eyes of that individual. So I don’t believe that they are indifferent to beauty. Why should
they [be]? They are unconcerned with moral beauty, surely, but that is not what is meant
here by beauty. And they are terribly concerned with strength.
Student: Sure, I have seen soap operas too, I mean horse operas. But I wonder if in a
certain kind of society, if they were wholly occupied with war or piracy or something, 11
this kind of thing is less possible or less their concern.
LS: You mean a warlike society would not be concerned with beauty, particularly?
Student: No, they wouldn’t have time for that kind of thing.
LS: I see what you mean. In other words, you say the full concern with the human goods
presupposes an awareness of the divine goods.
Student: Well, a really good society I think would.
LS: He does not deny that. If we have the choice between a very virtuous man who is in
addition healthy, handsome or beautiful, strong and wealthy, we would say, at least as far
as he is concerned, life would be better for him if he had these four bodily qualities than
if he had the opposite defects. That is obvious. But what I am concerned with was
whether it is true that the possession of the virtues guarantees the possession of the bodily
goods and the external goods. And that I think is not true.
Student: I wouldn’t say so either, but I was trying somehow to answer the question,
whose virtues are these that they are talking about?
LS: Of the individuals and of the society. That would not make any difference.

ii

Gangster moll: the female companion of a gangster.

84
Student: I was trying to relate it somehow to the discussion of the legislator and the
lawgiver.
LS: Well, I believe I can show you this connection as follows . . . In order to understand
that one must always consider the alternative. Now what is the alternative? That the
divine goods are not the necessary and sufficient condition of the human goods. What
would this mean? Commonsensically speaking, you need,12 as Aristotle puts it,
equipment. [Certainly Aristotle would grant that and Plato in the Laws is also aware of
that.] Let me take the simple Aristotelian formula: happiness is virtue plus equipment. By
equipment he means bodily and external goods; for example, Priam after the conquest of
Troy, who lost all equipment. This is a terrible understatement, I’m sorry. He was of
course miserable. He was not precisely miserable, but no one, as Aristotle emphasizes,
could call him happy. That much is certain. Now if you have this virtue plus equipment,
which comes first? Now virtue is much higher than equipment, there is no question about
that. But what comes first in time? After all, a child does not have virtue. But in order to
be brought up well does he not need certain conditions in his home, among his parents?
According to Aristotle the parents have to be reasonably well off, otherwise they cannot
take care of him. For example, if the father and mother work then they cannot pay
sufficient attention to the child. Now what follows from that? In a way, virtue
presupposes equipment. But if that is so, a very great question arises: What about the
acquisition of the equipment, if the equipment comes first and virtue is not yet there? You
would acquire the equipment without virtue, by hook and by crook. And then later on,
after you have the necessary conditions, you acquire virtue.
That is the problem of Machiavelli. The ancients were familiar with the problem, only
they had solved it differently. Machiavelli’s point is this: certain conditions must be
fulfilled before man can be virtuous. But if this is so, the guaranteeing of those conditions
cannot be subject to the requirements of morality. That is a great problem. Is this not
clear? If the virtues, the divine goods, do not guarantee the presence of the indispensable
human goods, then the acquisition of the human goods will follow rules not guided by the
virtues, not guided by morality. And then very grave consequences, ultimately those of
Machiavelli, follow: First you get peace and stability and the other conditions, but you
get peace and stability not by virtue, not by moral means, but by mere toughness—
strength, war, or however you call it. That is the question. Plato doesn’t solve the
problem by saying the divine goods guarantee the presence of the human goods. One can
say he conceals that problem by that. But every concealment is, of course, a revealing,
because he forces us to think about it by this strange and untrue statement, and thus to
find out the reason of the concealment. And therewith he reveals certain problems. That
is the issue.
Student: This may be just a matter of translation, but I am bothered by the fact that it
specifically says in 631c that he who receives the greater, meaning the greater goods,
acquires also the less, or else he is bereft of both. Now by this does Plato mean to say that
the virtuous man who is not handsome is bereft of virtue? This would include Socrates,
certainly.

85
LS: Let me see how he translates that. 13 “The human goods are dependent on the divine
and he who receives the greater acquires also the less.” (631b-c)
Student: “or else he is bereft of both.”
LS: In other words, if he does not have the divine goods, he has neither the divine nor the
human goods.
Student: But it also says that if he has not the human, that if in acquiring the divine he
does not also acquire the human, that he will be bereft of both of them. That is to say,
without the human he cannot have the divine.
LS: That is what I suggested as a possible conclusion of that long argument. But when he
says here, “if he receives the larger then he acquires also the lesser ones, and if not . . . ,”
now the verb is omitted, but in fairness you have to insert the verb of the previous
conditional clause, which is: if he does not receive the larger ones, the bigger ones, he
will be deprived of both. That is the only possible fair interpretation, and grammatically
correct interpretation. That Plato’s omission of the verb is perhaps not due merely to
grammatical convenience, I would be the first to grant. And from this point of view I
would consider what you say, but not as the first level of the discussion. On the first level
it is surely paradoxical to say that if someone possesses, say, virtue, he is for this reason
already healthy, wealthy, beautiful and strong. You know, Socrates was surely14 [neither]
beautiful nor wealthy, although he seems to have been very healthy and very strong.
Surely, and vice versa. There is no question. That is what I said; and therefore the
statement as we find it here is untrue but it is not a nonsensical statement. It is an untruth
which is better for us to act upon, perhaps, even than [upon] the truth. That is the
meaning of a mythical statement. Do you know why it is better to act upon? Because if
we do not act upon it, we are likely to use our bodily or external defects as excuses: I’m
sick, I’m lonely, I’m from a broken home. You hear this all the time. How does a man
know that the fact that he is sick, ugly, from a broken home and so on, is the cause for
such a conduct? There are people who have these defects and do not shoot other people.
So it is better to say these things are trivial, as Plato suggested, although in some cases
they may be relevant: for example, what a man can do depends to some extent on
strength, in some cases on wealth, and so on.
Student: Is it possible that he might be suggesting that one could not know human
virtues unless he is already imbued with the divine virtues. In short, the problem of
knowing what virtues are rather than having virtues.
LS: Now here there is a misunderstanding. He doesn’t speak of divine virtues but of
divine goods. And the divine goods are the virtues, the human virtues. Then your
question is: Can a man possess a virtue, say justice, without knowing what justice is?
Student: Could he know what, say, beauty was unless he knew what, say, justice or
temperance was?

86
LS: What would common sense say to this question?
Student: Yes, he could.
LS: It all depends. I mean, if we understand beauty in the crude way in which I used it
when speaking of these gangsters, surely they have a sense of the beautiful woman as
against the ugly woman. They may be very good judges in this respect, and yet they may
not even have an inkling of what justice is. But still the question would be: Does the
really good judgment, even of bodily beauty—in other words, the distinction between
beauty and mere prettiness or handsomeness—does this not require some moral
illumination? But that is the subtle question. We are here now concerned really with the
surface of the whole thing. Let us take wealth as the simplest example. To distinguish
between a rich man and a poor man quite a few people are capable who lack all moral
judgment. They smell wealth by a kind of animal instinct.
Now let us go on because we have much to do. We turn now to 632d9 to e715. Let us
begin with the speech of the Athenian on the middle of the page.
Reader:
[Ath.:] We ought, as I think, to do as we did at first—start from the beginning to explain
first the institutions which have to do with courage; and after that we shall, if you wish,
deal with a second and a third form of goodness. And as soon as we have completed our
treatment of the first theme, we shall take that as our model and by a discussion of the
rest on similar lines beguile the way; and at the end of our treatment of goodness in all its
forms we shall make it clear, if God will, that the rules we discussed just now had virtue
for their aim.iii (632d-e)
LS: I can only comment here that in the Greek he calls this deliberation or consideration
that they are doing “the telling of a myth.” Now here a new beginning is then made, as
you see, which is based on the premise that the true intention of the legislator—don’t
forget that we have to do with divine legislators here, Apollo, and Zeus—is the sound
intention. That is the premise which is presupposed. The Cretan laws look bad, but that is
an error of the Cretans—because, since the laws were given by a god, Zeus, or in Sparta
by Apollo, the laws themselves must be sensible; only the Cretans misinterpret them. We
have seen this all the time. The sound intention regarding laws is, of course, the intention
according to nature. And here we find a formula of the problem: virtue has various forms,
various kinds. They are also here called—although that doesn’t come out in the
translation, it will become clear in a later passage—parts of virtue; virtue has parts or
forms. All these virtues look there, in that direction. Where? He cannot mean at virtue,
but at the ruling intelligence. Now something strange happens immediately afterward. Do
you have that? Megillus. For the first time our Laconic friend, Spartan friend, takes the
initiative. Very strange. Let us read that.
Reader:
iii

In the Loeb: “goodness for their aim” for “virtue for their aim.”

87
[Meg.:] A good suggestion! And begin with our friend here, the panegyrist of Zeus—try
first to put him to the test. (632a)
LS: What induces Megillus to take the initiative?
Student: He wants to avoid talking about Sparta.
LS: Very good. So in other words, he is compelled to speak because otherwise the
Athenian might take him on to the disadvantage of the Spartan laws. But you see he is
concerned not only with himself—that would not be becoming such a gentleman—but he
is concerned with Sparta. For the sake of Sparta he is willing even to talk.
Student: It is also piety, isn’t it? Because we have the indication that you have to
sacrifice something or that the law is against saying that sort of thing. So in a way . . .
LS: Sure. But now in the sequel Megillus is caught by our wily Athenian. Let us see how
this happens.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Try I will, and to test you too and myself; for the argument concerns us all alike.
Tell me then—
LS: Now this is the plural in Greek. That can’t be brought out in the translation.
Reader:
do we assert that the common meals and the gymnasia were devised by the lawgiver with
a view to war? (633a)
LS: And these are of course institutions common to Sparta and Crete, and therefore they
concern the Spartans as much as the Cretans. But he speaks only of a single legislator.
And Megillus says yes, although the Athenian had said, “Tell me, both of you.” How
come? How come16 Megillus speaks although the Cretan too is addressed and the Cretan
is much more easygoing in speech? I take this only as an example; we cannot take up all
these cases. But these are questions which one must consider if one wants to understand.
While such a single question is trivial, it is always ultimately linked up with the important
issues. How can you understand such a conversational situation? Someone very reticent,
a man who hates to talk, and the other likes to talk, and both are addressed. And
nevertheless the slow man answers, and the easygoing speaker does not answer. How
would it most naturally happen?
Student: He is afraid of what the other one might answer.
LS: Yes, or the other is silent, and then there is a vacuum. That is true. I repeat that I took
this only as an example of this kind of thing. Now let us read the immediate sequel.
Reader:

88
[Ath.:] And is there a third institution of the kind, and a fourth? For probably one ought
to employ this method of enumeration also in dealing with the subdivisions (or whatever
we ought to call them) of the other forms of virtue. iv (633a)
LS: “Subdivisions” is of course a very bad word. “The other parts.” You see, he leaves it
open whether one can, strictly speaking, speak of parts. But these parts or whatever we
might call them are the same as what he called above forms. That is a very deep problem
in Plato, the relation of forms and parts, which is discussed in the dialogue Sophist. I
mention this only in passing. You see only the presence of the problem here. In other
words, we speak of courage, and we look to see how the Spartan or Cretan legislator
provided for courage. Two institutions were mentioned: common meals and gymnasia.
And now the Athenian wants more, a third and fourth. Let us read on.
Reader:
[Meg.:] The third thing he devised was hunting: so I and every Lacedaemonian would
say.
[Ath.:] Let us attempt also to state what comes fourth,—and fifth too, if possible. (633b)
LS: You see, the Athenian wants to go on and on. He asks for three and four: he has only
three, and now he says, “give me four and five.” Now what does he say?
Reader:
[Meg.:] The fourth also I may attempt to state: it is the training, widely prevalent amongst
us, in hardy endurance of pain, by means both of manual contests and of robberies carried
out every time at the risk of a sound drubbing; moreover, the “Crypteia,”v as it is called,
affords a wonderfully severe training in hardihood, as the men go bare-foot in winter and
sleep without coverlets and have no attendants, but wait on themselves and rove through
the whole countryside both by night and by day. Moreover in our games,vi we have
severe tests of endurance, when men unclad do battle with the violence of the heat,—and
there are other instances so numerous that the recital of them would be well-nigh endless.
(633b-c)
LS: Now that enumeration stops from here as you will see. We have now number four,
five and six, distinguished from each other by “furthermore,” [or] “moreover”—eti in
Greek. The fifth is the central of these three, and that is the krypteia. And what is the
krypteia? That is a very interesting institution.
Student: The young men did police work with the Helots, to keep the people in line.
LS: Yes. It consisted also in getting rid of, in a silent way, wealthy and respected Helots,
the Helots being the subjects of [. . .] Sparta. In other words, a kind of Spartan equivalent

iv

In the Loeb: “goodness” for “virtue.”
Part of the Spartan regiment of training their youth, consisting in sending the select among the
young Spartans in training to police the country in order to prevent Helot insurrection.
vi
The “Gymnopaedia,” or Spartan “Naked Games.”
v

89
of NKVD or Gestapo.vii That is mentioned here as in the center, and he has no choice but
to mention this somewhat unsavory institution. 17 And we see that he says [there are]
innumerable18 [other institutions of a similar kind]. [Sparta has then] taken care of
courage or manliness very well, under one condition, as is shown in the sequel: if courage
is identical with control of fear or pain. But what about the control of desires or
pleasures? This would seem to be the natural supplement to control of fear or pain.
Therefore Socrates, or the Athenian Stranger, suggests here that courage consists of two
parts: one having to do with the control of fear or pain—what we ordinarily call
courage—and then [another with] the control of desire or pleasure—what we ordinarily
would call temperance or moderation. What did the divine legislators do in order to
produce the second half of courage? How did they make their citizens first tasteless in
order then to teach them to control the desire for pleasure? The answer given then is
[that] neither Sparta nor Crete can show much in this respect. And that is very important.
For one half of courage, perhaps the more important part of courage, the divine
legislators have not provided. At this moment it is no longer possible to avoid the frontal
attack on the allegedly divine laws. You may remember what we discussed last time: a
frontal attack was never made; the premise that these are divine and therefore good laws
was never questioned; all kinds of substitutes were used, e.g., poets and so on. Now that
is one point. The other point is this. Who makes the criticism of Spartan and Cretan laws
in this dialogue? Who?
Student: The Stranger.
LS: An Athenian. Now that is very important, you see, because contrary to what some
people say it is not sufficient to consider the content of the criticism, it is also important
to consider the critic himself. If an Athenian criticizes Cretan laws in Crete, his criticism
becomes mixed up with a political problem. Let us take the simpler case of Sparta. If an
Athenian attacks the Spartan laws, how do we know that this is not a politically inspired
attack? Well, in every political debate you know that this has happened. You know, if
someone makes a remark about the budget, the other man will immediately say that this
is political, regardless of whether it is sound or unsound. But this applies even more to
people who belong to different civil societies. The Athenian is aware of this difficulty
and therefore he doesn’t speak in his own name; he speaks in this first speech (634b to c)
of the view of many, what many say, not what he says. But before he comes to the
criticism of Sparta, he praises Sparta, or Crete for that matter. Now this praise is very
remarkable, [starting on 634d6]19.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Whether men are right or wrong in their censures of the Laconian polity and the
Cretan—that is another story; anyhow, what is actually said by most men I, probably, am
in a better position to state than either of you. For in your case (your laws being wisely
framed) one of the best of your laws will be that which enjoins that none of the youth
shall inquire which laws are wrong and which right, but all shall declare in unison, with
one mouth and one voice, that all are rightly established by divine enactment— (634d-e)
vii

NKVD: The People’s Commissariat for Internal Affairs, the public and secret police
organization of the Soviet Union; Gestapo: secret state police of Nazi Germany.

90

LS: “That they are nobly laid down, having been laid down by gods.” That is the answer
given by the whole community.
Reader:
and shall turn a deaf ear to anyone who says otherwise— (634e)
LS: That is too weak. “Not to tolerate,” “not to stand for [it], if someone speaks
differently.”
Reader:
and further, that if any old man has any stricture to pass on any of your laws, he must not
utter such views in the presence of any young man, but before a magistrate or one of his
own age. (634e)
LS: Now what is that? This is a wonderful institution of Sparta and Crete. What does it
amount to? All will publicly say, with one voice: All our laws are wonderful. But an old
man may say to the magistrates: This law of ours is not so good; it should be changed.
That is one of the many examples of the noble lie. Let us not hesitate to use this word,
because it is a lie, of course, if everyone is supposed to praise laws unqualifiedly
regardless of whether it is true or not. But this is necessary for the sake of stability;
therefore it is a noble lie and not a vulgar or common lie. Now let us read the sequel.
Reader:
[Kl.] A very sound observation, Stranger; and just like a diviner, far away though you are
from the original lawgiver, you have fairly spotted, as I think, his intention, and described
it with perfect truth. (634e-635a)
LS: Now you see, a soothsayer or a diviner, but a diviner who does not prophecy, doesn’t
predict the future but who predicts the past (if one can say that) or knows the past. Now
there was a famous Cretan soothsayer, who will be mentioned later, Epimenides, viii of
whom they said, as Aristotle has it, that he could foretell the past, the remote past which
was no longer known. A retrospective prophet. In the nineteenth century someone said
this of the historian: because he divined what had happened in the past. And you see also
the interesting thing that this wise Athenian reminds him somehow of the indigenous
wise man; he was also good at foretelling the remote past. Now continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, there are no young people people with us now; so we may be permitted by
the lawgiver, old as we are, to discuss these matters among ourselves privately without
offence.
[Kl.:] That is so. Do you, then, have no scruple in censuring our laws; for there is nothing
discreditable in being told of some flaw; rather it is just this which leads to a remedy, if
the criticism be accepted not peevishly but in a friendly spirit. (635a-b)
viii

A sixth century BC Greek seer. Plutarch discusses Epimenides’s contribution of his expertise
in religious rituals to Solon, in the latter’s reform of Athens (Plutarch, Life of Solon, 12).

91

LS: So in other words,20 [the Athenian] is a very practical man, as we see here. He has
created the right spirit in which the Cretan and Spartan will be willing to listen to a
criticism by an Athenian. Now in the sequel there is made an explicit transition from
courage to moderation. The pretence is dropped21 that control of pleasure is in itself
courage. The question is raised now: What did your lawgivers do in order to produce
moderation? And then the answer given is? Well, again: Our gymnasia and our common
meals. To which the Athenian says: Well, you know what they say, they say that [this]
leads to the opposite; it leads to such things as homosexuality. Let us read that 22 ([636b1]
to d7), the long speech of the Athenian where he beings to speak of the gymnasia.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So these common meals, for example, and these gymnasia, while they are at
present beneficial to the States in many other respects, yet in the event of civil strife they
prove dangerous (as is shown by the case of the youth of Miletus, Bocotia and Thurii);ix
and, moreover, this institution, when of old standing, is thought to have corrupted the
pleasures of love which are natural not to men only but also natural to beasts. (636b)
LS: I try to translate it literally according to the original reading of the manuscript. There
is a certain difficulty which arises here. “And it seems to have corrupted an ancient law
and a law according to nature, namely, referring to the pleasures regarding sexual things
applying not only to men but to the brutes as well.” Now that I think is a very important
reference to the natural law, to the notion of natural law. So we get here one example, one
more specific example. There is a certain order of nature regarding, say, that sex is meant
for procreation. And therefore homosexuality is a corruption of that. This is called an
ancient law and according to nature. That is a kind of transition from the prephilosophic
notion, one can say. When Antigone speaks in the Antigone of that law which she obeys,
where one does not know the origin, you know [it is] old, very old. And then this much
more precise statement: according to nature, meaning [that] the oldness has not very
much to do with that; it is inherent in the nature of living beings as living beings. Let us
see how he goes on from here.
Reader:
[Ath.:] For this states x are held primarily responsible, and along with them all others that
especially encourage the use of gymnasia. And whether one makes the observation in
earnest or in jest, one certainly should not fail to observe that when male unites with
female for procreation the pleasure experienced is held to be due to nature— (636b-c)
LS: You see, it is held to be.23 [It] is important that Plato does not say [that] this here
definitely24 is according to nature. He says: It seems to be, is thought to be, believed to
be. And you see also that he leaves it open whether one may not speak about these things
jestingly as distinguished from seriously. This remains open here. Now you see what this
means with a view to the question I said before. We seek for the natural standards, but
then the natural standards are [not] as easily accessible as many people think. For
ix
x

Ancient Greek city-states.
In the Loeb: “your States” for “states.”

92
example, whether this principle regarding homosexuality is natural, properly speaking, is
left open. This same subject will be discussed later. Now read the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] but contrary to nature when male mates with male or female with female, and that
those first guilty of such enormities were impelled by their slavery to pleasure. (636c)
LS: We do not need the next section, although it is from other points of view extremely
important. Now I would like only to give a brief report about the immediate sequel. The
situation: now the Athenian has for the first time openly criticized a Spartan and Cretan
institution, with the understanding that if this was given by Zeus and Apollo they are very
poor legislators. And this refers to the common meals and the gymnasia and the bad
moral effects. Megillus is hurt, and what does he do? He acts as every man in such a
situation would act: he hits back. And he says: We have our gymnasia, and there may be
something wrong with that, but you have your symposia, your banquets: everyone drunk.
Absolutely disgraceful. There is no drunkenness in Crete and Sparta. The Athenian enters
into the spirit and says: Well, on the other hand you Spartans are famous for the
licentiousness of your women; don’t forget that Helen was a Spartan. Don’t think these
are mere jokes, because this has very much to do with the problem of laws—because
these attitudes in defending and attacking laws are a part of law. A law, if it is really a
ruling force, engenders these habits of defending. And therefore this is as much a part of
the substance of law as the provisions proper. Now let us see the long speech of the
Athenian in 637c.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Oh Lacedaemonian Stranger, xi all such indulgences are praiseworthy where there
exists a strain of firm moral fiber, but where this is relaxed they are quite stupid. An
Athenian in self-defence might at once retaliate by pointing to the looseness of the
women in your country. (637b-c)
LS: He doesn’t say an Athenian [simply], [but] someone defending himself. He is a bit
cruder than . . . Continue.
Reader:
Regarding all such practices, whether in Tarentum, Athens or Sparta, there is one answer
that is held to vindicate their propriety. The universal answer to the stranger who is
surprised at seeing in a State some unwonted practice is this: “Be not surprised, O
Stranger: such is the custom with us: with you, perhaps, the custom in these matters is
different.” (637c)
LS: You see, a kind of convenient, tolerant relativism. But which, as stated here, is only a
sign of politeness: “Well, that is our way, and that is your way, and that is all there is to
it.” But that is not sufficient. Why?

xi In the Loeb: “O Stranger of Lacedaemon.”

93
Reader:
But, my dear sirs, our argument now is not concerned with the rest of mankind but with
the goodness or badness of the lawgivers themselves. (637d)
LS: So in other words, the individual human being is perfectly excused if he follows the
habits and laws of his country. But the legislator is not excused by that, therefore we must
raise the question. We can’t leave it at saying this is our law and habit and that is yours;
we have to consider the question itself. The subject now becomes, through the Spartan’s
act of defense, drunkenness. The Athenian is compelled by his situation to defend
drunkenness. You must see how wise that is. Because this must appear to the Cretan and
the Spartan as a sign of simple Athenian patriotism. He defends an Athenian institution in
a foreign country. That is the right thing to do. But the Athenian has another purpose in
mind, as we shall see later. But the main point is this: he must be intelligible to his fellow
speakers. And he becomes intelligible to them not as a “philosopher,” but he becomes
intelligible to them as an Athenian who patriotically defends an Athenian institution
which was attacked in a foreign country. That is always necessary to understand Plato’s
statements in this way. In other words, all statements of Platonic characters must make
sense not only as absolute statements but they must make sense certainly as statements of
the speaker in this situation, otherwise he would lack practical wisdom. I am speaking
now of the chief speakers, the spokesmen, and not of the others who frequently show a
lack of practical wisdom.
Now we can also dismiss the immediate sequel here, although if we had time we should
read that. Here the Spartan says: Well, we lick all these people who drink so much, and
lick them easily. And the Athenian says that doesn’t decide the issue; sometimes by mere
physical superiority the inferior polis vanquishes the stronger. You see, that shows that
the divine goods do not guarantee the human goods. The virtuous polis which was
mentioned here, which is it? A Sicilian city, I believe—no, the Locrians and the Ceians.
The inhabitants of the island of course were virtuous people; it was a virtuous city. They
were defeated by the morally inferior Athenians and lost their liberty in a way, their
wealth, and everything else. So the possession of virtue does not guarantee the possession
of the external goods and the bodily goods, as I believe most of you would admit,
unfortunately all too easily.
Now [to] this discussion of drunkenness which begins here. Let us read the beginning of
the next statement of the Athenian, 638c.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In my opinion all those who take up an institution for discussion and propose, at
its first mention, to censure it or commend it, are proceeding in quite the wrong way.
Their action is like that of a man who, when he hears somebody praising cheese as a good
food, at once starts to disparage it, without having learnt either its effects or its mode of
administration—in what form it should be administered and by whom and with what
accompaniments, and in what condition and to people in what condition. This, as it seems
to me, is exactly what we are now doing in our discourse. At the first mention of the mere
name of drunkenness, straightway we fall, some of us to blaming it, others to praising it;

94
which is most absurd. Each party relies on the aid of witnesses, and while the one party
claims that its statement is convincing on the ground of the large number of witnesses
produced, the other does so on the ground that those who abstain from wine are seen to
be victorious in battle; and then this point also gives rise to a dispute. Now it would not
be at all to my taste to go through all the rest of the legal arrangements in this fashion;
and about our present subject, drunkenness, I desire to speak in quite another fashion (in
my opinion, the right fashion), and I shall endeavor, if possible, to exhibit the correct
method for dealing with all such subjects; for indeed the view of them adopted by your
two States would be assailed and controverted by thousands upon thousands of nations.
(638c-e)
LS: I note only one point. This discussion of drunkenness takes all the rest of the first
book and the whole second book. This discussion is also meant to be a specimen of a
discussion of any legal provision. It is meant to be an example of it. The question, of
course, arises: Why did he choose drunkenness and not, say, what to do with heiresses, or
what to do with battery? We must try to answer that question later. Then in the sequel he
develops the principle. The rejection of an activity of a being, like goats, or of an activity
relating to a being, because that activity is damaging when the being is not properly
guided, is absurd. The rejection of banquets, drunkenness in banquets, is absurd because
it is based on the observation only of banquets in which there was no proper guidance.
The Athenian Stranger says this: You behave as if you were to condemn the breeding of
goats because you have seen only goats destroying gardens and trees and so on, and you
have not seen them properly placed where they couldn’t do any harm to trees, etc. And
then goats can be wonderful creatures supplying you with milk and other things. That is
what you do.xii
Reader:
[Ath.:] Now has anyone ever yet beheld this institution rightly conducted? Both of you
can easily make answer—“Never yet at all,” for with you this institution is neither
customary nor legal; but I have come across many modes of banqueting in many places,
and I have also inquired into nearly all of them, and I have scarcely seen or heard of a
single one that was in all points rightly conducted; for if any were right at all, it was only
in a few details, and most of them were almost entirely on the wrong lines. (639d-e)
LS: So in other words, the Athenian admits that he has not seen a single proper banquet,
and yet he recommends banquets. The practical Cretan is naturally surprised. What does
he say?
Reader:
[Kl.:] What do you mean by that, Stranger? Explain yourself more clearly; for since we
are (as you observed) without any experience of such institutions, even if we did come
across them, we would probably fail to see at once what was right in them and what
wrong. (639e-640a)
xii

There was a break at this point in the tape. The tape picks up in the middle of the Athenian’s
speech (with “in many places”), which is here reproduced in full.

95
LS: Now the Athenian has now to answer this question: How can you judge of the
goodness of institutions of which you have not observed a single good example? How
can you recommend an institution for the working of which there is not a single bit of
empirical evidence? Is it not a problem? And [I] think that all, or almost all, reformers do
exactly that. They recommend an institution which has never been seen in the world. The
secondary reformer is uninteresting. Say, something has been done in Norway, and then
he recommends it in the United States. That is easy. But the first reformer in Norway,
how could he possibly convince any sane man? How could he do it? The answer to that
question is here in the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] That is very probable. Try, however, to learn from my description. This you
understand—that in all gatherings and associations for any purpose whatsoever it is right
that each group should always have a commander. (640a)
LS: Do you understand, he says. And the Cretan grants it. Now we can’t read the detail,
but what does he do? What is the method which he follows? Well, every institution
belongs to a kind of institution or to a genus of institution, and we know something of
that genus. We have even empirical knowledge of that. And then we apply what we have
learned about the genus. Now what is the argument? The thesis stated here is this: that for
every institution there must be a ruler, a competent man who controls all the business.
And therefore banquets can be recommended only if they take place under the guidance
of competent men. Who are the competent men in this case? He gives here a provisional
statement, 640d. Now a banquet consists of people in a state of drinking and also of
drunkenness. And what therefore must be the qualification of the ruler, if this is . . .
Student: Soberness.
LS: He must be sober, just as a general, who has to rule potential cowards in a very
difficult situation, must be very brave. So this much is clear. Now what does he say after
that?
Reader:
[Ath:] Then the commander we set over drunken men should be sober and wise, rather
than the opposite? For a commander of drunkards who was himself drunken, young, and
foolish would be very lucky if he escaped doing some serious mischief. (640d)
LS: Why does youth disqualify? Why could there not be a sober and wise man who is
young, and controls the drinkers?
Student: He would not have the respect of the drunken people, the age.
LS: Yes, that is very good, but let us keep this in mind for later. There is a kind of shift
somehow from wisdom to old age. We will see that later. So when we recommend
banquets, the Athenian Stranger says, we will consider only such banquets as are
presided over by wise, old and sober men. All right. But the Cretan rightly says: What

96
will be the use of properly conducted banquets, where everyone except the president gets
drunk? And then the Athenian makes a very strange suggestion: it is useful for education.
And naturally the Athenian is compelled to show this, as he puts it (641e), in some way
or another. Surely, in some way or another he will show it. Again there is a nice
rhetorical device at the end of 641. The Athenian must make a long speech, and now he
says: Well, if I make now a long speech, you will say that is a typical Athenian (because
the Athenians were well known for liking to talk), and that may arouse your prejudice.
The latter, of course, he does not say. And now what happens? What do the Spartan and
Cretan do? You see, this overcoming of the resistance of the Cretan and Spartan is the
real action of the first part of the dialogue. We will later on see why this is pertinent to
the question of law. What do they do? Let us read this speech (642) of Megillus.
Reader:
[Meg.:] Oh Stranger of Athens, you are not, perhaps, aware that our family is, in fact, a
“proxenus” of your state. (642b)
LS: Proxenos is a legal institution. Do you know what it is?
Student: It is the equivalent of ambassadors or consuls.xiii
LS: Yes. Now continue.
Reader:
[Meg.:] It is probably true of all children that, when once they have been told that they
are “proxeni” of a certain State, they conceive an affection for that State even from
infancy, and each of them regards it as a second motherland, next after his own country.
That is precisely the feeling I now experience. For through hearing mere children crying
out—whenever they, being the Lacedaemonians, were blaming the Athenians for
anything or praising them— (642b-c)
LS: Blaming comes first. Continue.
Reader:
[Meg.:] “Your state, Megillus, has done us a bad turn or a good one— ”
LS: Also the bad comes first.
Reader:
through hearing such remarks, I say, and constantly fighting your battles against those
who were thus decrying your State— (642c)
LS: You see, in other words, Megillus is a praiser of the Athenians.
Reader:
xiii Specifically, a native, who represents the foreign state.

97
I acquired a deep affection for it; so that now not only do I delight in your accent, but I
regard as absolutely true the common saying that “good Athenians are always
incomparably good,” for they alone are good not by outward compulsion but by inner
disposition. Thus, so far as I am concerned, you may speak without fear and say all you
please. (642c-d)
LS: By the way, it is also remarkable that this great praise of the Athenian giftedness, the
strongest praise of Athenian giftedness ever occurring in Plato, is entrusted to a Spartan,
not to an Athenian. But what does this argument mean? Megillus assures the Athenian of
his benevolence for Athens. How did he acquire that benevolence?
Student: By defending Athens when he was a child.
LS: By fighting for Athens, by conferring a benefit on Athens, he became benevolent
toward Athens. The same is true, in a different way, of Clinias. But that sounds strange to
us, but it was not strange to the Greeks. They had a name for that. Does anyone among
you know what virtue Megillus exhibits by this remark?
Student: Magnanimity.
LS: Magnanimity, surely. The magnanimous man remembers benefits which he confers
upon others, not the benefits which have been conferred on him. That is, we can say, the
Greek notion of pride, of noble pride—to remember the good you did to others, not the
good others did to you. It is in danger of being the opposite of gratitude, this kind of
pride. And the answer of Clinias has the same character.
So the Athenian has now secured benevolence. The argument is, as the old rhetoricians
called it, a captatio benevolentiae. Capturing the benevolence of the audience is the first
duty of a speaker, and that he achieves. Now we come to the substantive question: What
is education? Because we have been told drunkenness is a major help conducive to
education. And this answer is given again in a long speech of the Athenian, which we
have to consider. 643b following.
Reader:
[Ath:] I will. What I assert is that every man who is going to be good at any pursuit must
practice that special pursuit from infancy, by using all the implements of his pursuit both
in his play and in his work. For example, the man who is to make a good builder must
play at building toy houses, and to make a good farmer he must play at tilling land; and
those who are rearing them must provide each child with toy tools modelled on real ones.
Besides this, they ought to have elementary instruction in all the necessary subjects,—the
carpenter, for instance, being taught in play the use of rule and measure, the soldier
taught riding or some similar accomplishment. So, by means of their games, we should
endeavour to turn the tastes and desires of the children in the direction of that object
which forms their ultimate goal. First and foremost, education, we say, consists in that
right nurture which most strongly draws the soul of the child when at play to a love for
that pursuit of which, when he becomes a man, he must possess a perfect mastery. Now

98
consider, as I said before, whether, up to this point, you are satisfied with this statement
of mine. (643b-d)
LS: Now what did he say up to now about what education is, what the objective of
education is?
Student: Vocational.
LS: No, that is not enough. The objective of education is love, eros, of excellence in that
thing, in that activity, which he wants to be practiced when he [is] a grown-up man. That
is the function of education in general. But that is too general to fit education proper. For
example, we would not call a man who has acquired a love of breeding25 goats, so that he
will later on become a first-rate goat breeder, an educated man. And therefore he has to
give a more specific definition in the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath:] But we must not allow our description of education to remain indefinite. For at
present, when censuring or commending a man’s upbringing, we describe one man as
educated and another as uneducated, though the latter may often be uncommonly well
educated in the trade of a pedlar or a skipper, or some other similar occupation. But we,
naturally, in our present discourse are not taking the view that such things as these make
up education: the education we speak of is training from childhood in goodness, which
makes a man eagerly desirous of becoming a perfect citizen, understanding how both to
rule and be ruled righteously. (643d-e)
LS: That is the definition of education which is given here. The objective of education is
the production of love of the excellence of the citizen. And a man who has acquired that
love is an educated man. Now we must skip the immediate sequel. We have to answer the
question: Why do we need drunkenness for that? Can’t we get love of excellent
citizenship without going through a process of drinking? That is strange. Now what does
he say (644c4)?
Reader:
[Ath.]: May we assume that each of us by himself is a single unit?
[Kl.]: Yes.
[Ath.]: And that each possesses within himself two antagonistic and foolish counsellors,
whom we call by the names of pleasure and pain?
[Kl.]: That is so.
[Ath.]: And that, besides these two, each man possesses opinions about the future, which
go by the general name of “expectations”; and of these, that which precedes pain bears
the special name of “fear,” and that which precedes pleasure the special name of
“confidence”; and in addition to all these there is “calculation,” pronouncing which of
them is good, which bad; and “calculation,” when it has become a public decree of the
state is named “law.” (644c-d)

99
LS: Do you remember this? We have read this already in the Minos: the nomos, the law,
is a decree, the common decree of the city. That was said in the Minos. But here it is
specified that this common decree is primarily a reasoning. A reasoning about what? A
reasoning about the desires, fears, passions, and so on, with a view to goodness and
badness—in other words, which pleasures are good, which fears are good, and so on.
This reasoning, when it becomes a decree of the polis, is a law. You have a beautiful
example in prohibition: this was a reasoning leading to the rejection of drunkenness,
complete rejection of drunkenness—of drinking, even—and when it became a decree of
the polis then it became a law. But this is not what people ordinarily understand by law,
and you see this from the reaction of our Cretan friend.
Reader:
[Kl.:] I have some difficulty in keeping pace with you: assume, however, that I do so, and
proceed.
[Meg.:] I am in exactly the same predicament. (644d)
LS: If one would translate more literally it would be as follows: the same experience, the
same suffering is in me, within, Megillus says. Therefore the Athenian has to explain
that. And now there comes this famous statement of what a law is.
Student: Before you get into the explanation, I am just curious as to why the Athenian
here presents a definition of law which centers about pleasure and pain instead of about
goodness.
LS: Yes, that is a very necessary question. But can we wait a bit? I believe we can
answer the question in the sequel. It is only reasonable to demand why pleasure–pain:
why should pleasure and pain be that mater, that object on which law pronounces? Now
let us proceed.
Reader:
[Ath.] Let us conceive of the matter in this way. Let us suppose that each of us living
creatures is an ingenious puppet of the gods, whether contrived by way of a toy of theirs
or for some serious purpose—for as to that we know nothing; but this we do know, that
these inward affections of ours, like sinews or cords, drag us along and, being opposed to
each other, pull one against the other to opposite actions; and herein lies the dividing line
between virtue and badness. xiv (644d-e)
LS: Do you see, Mr. ___? Virtue and vice have to do with the proper attitude toward
pleasure and pain, all pleasures and all pains. For example, if you take justice, there is a
desire for wealth, greed, an attitude, [and] the proper regulation of that. And now?
Reader:
[Ath.] For, as our argument declares, there is one of these pulling forces which every man
should always follow and nohow leave hold of, counteracting thereby the pull of the
xiv In the Loeb: “goodness” for “virtue.”

100
other sinews: it is the leading-string, golden and holy, of “calculation,” entitled— (644e645a)
LS: That is not a bad translation, although a somewhat low translation—“calculation,”
logismos is really that. One could also say reasoning, but it is not totally wrong to say
calculation because if you think of reckoning with numbers, [you think] of calculation.
That is the most famous and classic form of reasoning. Continue.
Reader:
entitled the public law of the State; and whereas the other cords are hard and steely and of
every possible shape and semblance, this one is flexible and uniform, since it is of gold.
With that most excellent leading-string of the law we must needs co-operate always; for
since calculation is excellent, but gentle rather than forceful, its leading-string needs
helpers to ensure that the golden kind within us may vanquish the other kinds. In this way
our story comparing ourselves to puppets will not fall flat, and the meaning of the terms
“self-superior” and “self-inferior” will become somewhat more clear, and also how
necessary it is for the individual man to grasp the true account of these inward pulling
forces and to live in accordance therewith, and how necessary for the State (when it has
received such an account either from a god or from a man who knows) to make this into a
law for itself and be guided thereby in its intercourse both with itself and with all other
States. Thus both badness and goodness would be differentiated for us more clearly; and
these having become more evident, probably education also and the other institutions will
appear less obscure; and about the institution of the wine-party in particular it may very
likely be shown that it is by no means, as might be thought, a paltry matter which it is
absurd to discuss at great length but rather a matter which fully merits a long discussion.
xv (645a-c)
LS: Now this is the most specific statement about virtue and vice we have found up to
now.26 Virtue and vice have to do with pleasures and pains in the widest sense of the
term, because virtue is the right attitude toward pleasures and pains, and vice is the wrong
one. He begins here as follows. We are playthings of the gods; the gods move us. What
has this to do with the laws? This is not developed, but later on he makes an important
distinction between the polis and the individual. We have to control our pleasures and
pains. This control applies to the individual as well as to the society, but the control has a
different character in the individual than in the society. What is the proper control in the
case of an individual? That is in 645b4. The individual must take the alēthēs logos, the
true reasoning, the true speech, regarding these pushes and pulls and guide himself by it.
He must live in obedience to it.
What about the polis? Is the polis in need of that right reasoning? When he speaks of
what the polis has to take, he does not speak of the alēthēs logos, of the right reasoning,
but of logos simply, a reasoning—either from a god or from him who has known these
pushes and pulls. And on the basis of that reasoning, which is not necessarily a right
reasoning, it establishes the law with which one has to comply. Only the polis, not the
individuals, may need a god for its guidance. The gods do not necessarily guide us [as
xv

In the Loeb: “prolonged discussion” at the end of the passage.

101
individuals] toward the rational. As a simple proof, think of what Aphrodite does to men:
this does not necessarily lead men to the rational. Now we will take this subject up a bit
later after we have understood virtue better. Virtue has to do with pleasures and pains;
therefore, if we want to find out whether wine-drinking is significant regarding pleasures
and pains—well, does wine, wine-drinking have any relation to pleasure and pain? You
must know this from the literature if you don’t know it any other way. Well, what is it?
Let us spell it out. What does it do? Up to a certain point, I have read, it is gladdening; it
makes men pleased and gay. That is one part. Beyond that point it creates a problem, I
suppose. But let us rather listen to what our authority says in 645d, the next long speech
of the Athenian. You see, this is very amusing. Here the Athenian talks with two old
people coming from prohibitionist states or maybe from old Islam—they are not
supposed to know anything of this. That is the amusing thing here. But they must have
had some experience. Now let us see what he says.
Reader:
[Kl.:] In reference to what particular do you ask this question?
[Ath.:] To no particular, for the moment: I am putting the question in general terms—
“when this shares in that, what sort of thing does it become in consequence?” I will try to
convey my meaning still more clearly: what I ask is this—does the drinking of wine
intensify pleasures and pains and passions and lusts?
[Kl.:] Yes, greatly. (645d)
LS: How does he know?
Reader:
[Ath.:] And how about sensations and recollections and opinions and thoughts? Does it
make them likewise more intense? Or rather, do not these quit a man entirely if he
becomes surfeited with drink?
[Kl.:] Yes, they quit him entirely.
[Ath.:] He then arrives at the same condition of soul as when he was a young child?
[Kl.:] He does.
[Ath.:] So at that moment he will have very little control of himself?
[Kl.:] Very little. (645e-646a)
LS: So wine strengthens the passions, with the exception of fear, because people do not
become more fearful when they are drunk. Even the old Cretan knows this, who
shouldn’t know it. And while it strengthens the passions it weakens the perceptions. That
is also a universal verity. To the extent that it makes a man a child. And then in the next
speech he says:
Reader:
[Ath.:] And such a man is, we say, very bad?
[Kl.:] Very, indeed. (646a)
LS: That is all we need. Then we have the real paradox: Can the degradation of the soul
be beneficial to the soul? What a strange thing this is. And the Athenian recommends

102
that. What can this possibly mean? Now I report about the sequel only because the
second book will still take up this issue at great length. In the sequel he makes a
distinction between two kinds of fear: first, ordinary fear; and second, fear of bad
reputation, which is [the] sense of shame. The question is now how to produce this
second kind of fear. He gives this very interesting example, and says if you want to make
a man truly courageous and if there were a drink in the world which would lead to the
utmost of depression and fearfulness, would we not give this to men in order to make
them brave? Because after they have remained brave even under the influence of that
drink, how brave will they be afterward? This, I believe, is the description of the death
drink, hemlock, but we cannot go into that because here it is simply said such a drink
unfortunately doesn’t exist. But as for pleasures and for fearlessness, a drink exists, and
that precisely is wine. How to produce [a] sense of shame? Answer: by being exposed to
temptations. If there exists a drink which tends to make a man become utterly shameless
and yet he learns to resist the effects, then he will be truly shameful. In order to get the
most well bred, we make them drunk, so that they behave like perfect gentlemen even in
the state of perfect drunkenness, complete drunkenness. And then we have really
achieved the mastery. This is the effect of wine. Now let us look at that at the end of this
speech. I think we can read the last speech of the Athenian. Now this is a kind of utopian
proposal: let us make drunkenness an educational institution. And everyone who has
gone through that and learned to control himself, [learned] still to know what he does
while completely drunk, then we have achieved complete self-mastery in our pupils. That
would be wonderful. And then he gives another consideration in the speech which
follows, the speech we read now.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And are not these conditions in which we are of the character described,—anger,
lust, insolence, ignorance, covetousness, and extravagance; and these also,—wealth,
beauty, strength, and everything which intoxicates a man with pleasure and turns his
head? And for the purpose, first, of providing a cheap and comparatively harmless test of
these conditions, and, secondly, of affording practice in them, what more suitable
pleasurexvi can we mention than wine, with its playful testing—provided that it is
employed at all carefully? For consider: in the case of a man whose disposition is morose
and savage (whence spring numberless iniquities), is it not more dangerous to test him by
entering into money transactions with him, at one’s own personal risk, than by
associating with him with the help of Dionysus and his festive insight? And when a man
is a slave to the pleasures of sex, is it not a more dangerous test to entrust to him one’s
own daughters and sons and wife, and thus imperil one’s own nearest and dearest, in
order to discover the disposition of his soul? In fact, one might quote innumerable
instances in a vain endeavor to show the full superiority of this playful method of
inspection which is without either serious consequence or costly damage. Indeed, so far
as that is concerned, neither the Cretans, I imagine, nor any other people would dispute
the fact that herein we have a fair test of man by man, and that for cheapness, security
and speed it is superior to all other tests. (649d-650b)

xvi

In the Loeb: “device”

103
LS: What do they do today in order to test character? Do they use wine for that? I
imagine some people still do, and try to influence a man by cocktails and then see when
he opens up what is inside. But I think the Rorschach test and such things are used now.
Now this is interesting. Why do they not still use wine? I believe then you still have to
judge. I mean, for example, you make him drunk and then he behaves in a certain
manner, then you have to judge what this behavior indicates. But in the Rorschach test,
you know, you don’t have to judge properly, I believe, because if he gives this kind of
answer, you know this must be called this or that, if I am not mistaken. But at any rate,
the necessity of knowing characters was clearly recognized, only Plato thought that it was
much less expensive among other things. And now the last sentence of this chapter.
Reader:
[Ath.:] This then—the discovery of the natures and conditions of men’s souls—will
prove one of the things most useful to that art whose task it is to treat them; and that art is
(as I presume we say) the art of politics: is it not so? (650b)
LS: In other words, politics is not dependent on psychology, but psychology is a part of
politics because the same art which treats the soul and the habits is the one which has to
know the soul and the habits. That cannot be delegated to another art, because if you
divorce that merely contemplative study of the character from the practical study, from
the study of how they are to be treated, you get a wrong picture.
We have to stop our reading here. I would like only to mention a few points which could
not come out clearly in our reading of these selections. Now at a certain point in the
discussion, roughly in the middle of the first book, the Athenian Stranger says: Well, we
have finished our discussion of courage, because as far as courage is concerned your
legislations are perfectly sufficient in this respect. They do produce courageousness. But
what about moderation or temperance? So in this connection, as a means for making men
moderate, wine-drinking, in itself a thing likely to lead to immoderation, is suggested. In
this connection, while he discusses it, he makes a certain important substitution which we
must keep in mind for the rest of the dialogue, namely, instead of moderation,
sophrosynē, he says from a certain moment on aidōs, sense of shame. Sense of shame is
akin to moderation but it is not the same. This corresponds to a substitution of the old for
the wise. There is no necessity that the wise should be old, and there is no necessity that
the old should be wise. But popularly speaking it is justified to say, generally speaking,
the older men are the wiser men, because most men do become somewhat more sensible
through age. And the third substitution, which is equally important and which strictly
corresponds to them, is the substitution of law for wisdom, or rather for true reasoning.
Law reflects true reasoning if it is a good law, but it is not simply true reasoning, just as
oldness reflects wisdom and the sense of shame reflects moderation. But [when] speaking
of laws, we deal with these reflections rather than with the genuine thing. Laws are a
dilution, a necessary dilution, of something which in its undiluted form is of course
higher.
The education to moderation is said to take place through drunkenness. Wine takes away
all inhibitions. It makes men shameless. And this has one great advantage: it lets us see

104
the[ir] character. Some people who are very grumpy in ordinary life become very
chummy and nice when they are drunk; and others who seem to be very nice people
become vicious when they are drunk. The old proverb: in vino veritas, the truth is in
wine. Now if one wants to understand these discussions, and especially those of the book
following, one has to look forward toward the end of the second book. At the end of the
second book it is said: Here now we have reached the end of the speech regarding wine
[674c]. With a minor exaggeration, one can say the first two books, that is to say, a sixth
of the whole work is devoted to the subject of wine or of drunkenness. Surely, wine or
drunkenness is taken only as a specimen with which we should study how intelligent
legislative consideration would have to take place.
But the question is, of course: Why is wine chosen and not any other subject? Why is
wine the introduction to a conversation about laws? And I think one can give this general
answer. Wine has two opposite effects, as we have seen. I will restate them now as
follows, following Plato. First, wine leads to frankness. People say under the influence of
wine things they would never say when sober. So wine leads to a kind of sincerity which
you do not get necessarily without it. On the other hand, wine numbs the clarity of
thought, surely from a certain point on.
Now let us see how this affects our speakers. The ideal interlocutors in a conversation
regarding law are old lawyers, or administrators of a sort, in lawabiding communities,
communities which think along legal terms all the time—the Spartans and the Cretans.
But this very lawabidingness makes them disinclined to a change of law; they live in the
laws and they regard the laws as the last word. If they are to be induced to a change of
their laws, to an improvement of their laws, they must be loosened up. They must be
brought into a condition where they are willing to grant that their laws may have these
and these defects. They become more intelligent by wine-drinking. Of course they do not
drink wine; they only speak about wine-drinking. But, as you may perhaps find out or
you may even have found out today, when you talk about something which affects our
emotions, we suffer vicariously these emotions. In other words, if you would go into a
detailed discussion of how wine-drinking affects us, you would come into a gay mood.
You couldn’t help that. The speech about wine has vicariously the effect of drinking
wine. The same applies to other subjects which might be compared to that, as you could
also find out either experimentally or by reading the literature on the subject.
So the Spartan and Cretan need the wine for becoming more intelligent. But what about
our educator, our old Athenian Stranger, who is to educate them in the direction of better
laws? He is a free mind, anyway; he needs rather the opposite effect of wine, the
benumbing effect, the delimiting effect, in order to take seriously quite a few of these
issues in which he cannot be primarily interested, for example, how fishing and hunting
and other activities should be regulated. He would not be interested primarily in this.
There must be some compulsion, some limitation. The lowering of his intelligence is
brought about also by wine. I think again experience would show that. In some respects
people become more intelligent, the power of combination can be increased in many
people by drunkenness and that is in a way a higher intelligence. But other people

105
combine still better when they are sober. So by this conversation about wine-drinking, the
ideal situation for a serious discussion on laws is created.
A serious discussion on laws is not a theoretical discussion but a practical discussion as
to how to improve the laws here and now. And one starts such a discussion of course in a
most promising place, namely, in a state which has the best laws existing in fact. This
condition is fulfilled in Crete and Sparta, at least seemingly, at least according to the
general opinion. That is what takes place here. And therefore this meeting of the merely
political27 mind and the strictly philosophical mind on a common level. That is the
maximum you can expect as far as laws are concerned. And that is what Plato claims to
have done in this book, the Laws. The irony of the situation consists in the fact that many
of these laws which he will propose later on, and which are already indicated in the
banquet, were Athenian institutions, the old Athenian institutions, the Solonic
institutions, which he brings to Sparta and Crete. It is an attempt, in other words, to
civilize, one could say, the less civilized part of Greece. And that is brought about in this
way. And how drunkenness—i.e., banquets, common drinking—can be conducive to
education, to civilization, to culture, will be explained in the next book.

1

Deleted “than the.”
Deleted “virtue or its opposite, vice.”
3
Moved “must there.”
4
Deleted “and that is.”
5
Deleted “and they.”
6
Deleted “in this case."
7
Deleted “can.”
8
Deleted “he.”
9
Deleted “‘n.’”
10
Deleted “disregarding relevant things.”
11
Deleted “of.”
12
Moved “certainly Aristotle would grant that and Plato in the Laws is also aware of that.”
13
Deleted “page 25.”
14
Deleted “not.”
15
Deleted “page 29.”
16
Deleted “that.”
17
Moved “Sparta has then.”
18
Deleted “others.”
19
Deleted “640b7, page 35.”
20
Deleted “he.”
21
Deleted “as if.”
22
Deleted “636b4.”
23
Deleted “that.”
24
Deleted “that.”
25
Deleted “of.”
26
Deleted “the.”
27
Deleted “and.”
2

106
Session 5: January 29, 1959
Leo Strauss: I have to say almost the same as what I said about the previous paper. i
There were quite a few subtle remarks, some surely correct; for example, Megillus’s
strange silence for such a long part of the argument. In other words, the problems were at
least indicated, but the structure of the argument, of the obvious argument, has not
become clear. I will try to explain what I think is the structure of the argument. We have
to go into the details of course.
We have now read the first two books, and it is a very remarkable thing in a Platonic
dialogue that in a way the first two books deal with the highest theme. In a way. You
know usually a Platonic work ascends from the most superficial phenomena to the depth.
Think of the Republic, where the highest theme clearly comes to sight only in the center,
books 5 through 7. But here we have, in a way at any rate, the highest theme right at the
beginning, the highest theme being of course what is the end, the purpose, of legislation.
And this includes already a definition of law, which is given amazingly early for a
Platonic dialogue. Now this end of legislation, we have learned, is virtue. If that is so,
legislation is essentially education, moral education. A very amazing statement with a
view to what legislation means today and meant at all times. But this is surely not only
Plato’s view but Aristotle’s view as well. The chief instrument of moral education is
what? That appears from these two books.
Student: Music.
LS: Fine art, let us say. The Greek called that music.
Student: The Muses.
LS: Whatever the Muses supply. But since not all fine art is conducive to moral
goodness, we have therefore to find out what are the criteria of fine art. This is the theme
of the first two books. But all this is interwoven with the theme drunkenness or wine, and
we must understand this interwovenness a bit better. Now what is moral education? We
have to start from this question, or, What is education? as he simply puts it. The answer
given in the first book was: Arousing in children love of excellence in citizenship. At the
beginning of the second book it is said wine-drinking is a salvation, sōteria. How could
one translate this perhaps a bit better? A salvation of right education, meaning winedrinking is not an element of education, as we shall see later on, but the right education is
somehow saved, protected, by wine-drinking. This is the wholly mysterious statement at
the beginning of the book, and we must see later on in what sense this is true. After he
has made this statement he gives a new definition of education which we must read
(653a3 to e4). This is the first long speech of the Athenian in the second book.
Reader:
i

Strauss responds to a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the seminar. The reading was not
recorded.

107
[Ath.:] What I state is this,—that in children the first childish sensations are pleasure and
pain, and that it is in these first that goodness and badness come to the soul— (653a)
LS: Now he qualifies what he had said before. It is not true that pleasure and pain are the
sole matter of virtue; it is the primary matter.
Reader:
but as to wisdom and settled true opinions, a man is lucky if they come to him even in old
age; and he that is possessed of these blessings, and all that they comprise, is indeed a
perfect man. (653a-b)
LS: A complete human being, anthrōpos in Greek. It is very important that he doesn’t
say anēr, male man. Here now he defines the education of the human being, not the
education of the citizen.
Reader:
I term, then, the virtueii that first comes to children “education.” When pleasure and love,
and pain and hatred, spring up rightly in the souls of those who are unable as yet to grasp
a rational account; and when, after grasping the rational account, they consent thereunto
that they have been rightly trained in fitting practices:—this consent, viewed as a whole,
is goodness, while the part of it that is rightly trained in respect of pleasures and pains, so
as to hate what ought to be hated, right from the beginning up to the very end, and to love
what ought to be loved,—if you were to mark this part off in your definition and call it
“education,” you would be giving it, in my opinion, its right name. (653b-c)
LS: Well, can you state it in simple English, not that Plato didn’t have his reasons for that
complicated expression? But what does he understand then by education here?
Student: Knowledge of what is right and wrong.
LS: The word knowledge is ambiguous. Therefore it should be avoided.
Student: To love and to hate the right things, those things that ought to be loved and
hated.
LS: Without the logos. Therefore it is not knowledge. Well, you all know what is done to
children. They are told, “Do that and don’t do that,” or, “One does not do that.” And in
many cases the reasons cannot be given to the children, because they wouldn’t
understand them. So complete virtue consists, we can say, of habituation and
understanding of the reason why we do this and why we omit that. But the nonrational,
the prerational part of virtue, that is, education, [is] habituation.
But now he goes on. The sequel is also important.

ii In the Loeb: “goodness” for “virtue.”

108
Reader:
[Ath.:] Very good. Now these forms of child training— (653c)
LS: But what does Clinias say?
Reader:
[Kl.:] You are quite right, Stranger, as it seems to us, both in what you said before and in
what you say now about education. (653c)
LS: Yes. In other words, he is not aware of any difference. He is docile, but he is not
penetrating. Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Very good. Now these forms of child-training, which consist in right discipline in
pleasures and pains, grow slack and weakened to a great extent in the course of men's
lives; so the gods, in pity for the human race thus born to misery, have ordained the feasts
of thanksgiving as periods of respite from their troubles; and they have granted them as
companions in their feasts the Muses and Apollo the master of music, and Dionysus, that
they may at least set right again their modes of discipline by associating in their feasts
with gods. (653c-d)
LS: So here we have an indication of what this salvation of education means. Merely
habituated virtue becomes weakened in the course of time, and then these various gods,
including Dionysus, the god of wine, are said to restore it.
Now another point which I would like to mention here: let us loosely [re]call what is
done in the first part of education, an education in feeling as distinguished from
reasoning. The full virtue is a harmony between feeling induced by habituation and
understanding. This we must make clear. The most important silence, however, in this
definition of education is that there is no reference to law here, and that has something to
do with the fact that it is not a definition of the virtue of the citizen but 1 of the human
being. Habituation brought about by complying with do’s and don’t’s. Men resist these
mere do’s and don’t’s, and this resistance leads to a destruction of the habits; therefore
we must look for a way of habituation which does not arouse resistance. And that is
music education. For example, not simply say to a young child “Be quiet!” but order his
desire for moving. That is the simplest form of music. Dancing, dancing steps, for
example: regulated motion, not rest. And this combines the pleasure in mere motion and,
at the same time, the fine or noble, the harmonious. This is where the choruses come in.
So the choruses are the chief instrument of bringing about the harmony between feeling
and understanding. This music education is said to be given by the gods and by different
gods, the Muses, Apollo and Dionysus; or rather by the gods given through Muses,
Apollo and Dionysus. But the first education, that is to say everything we call ordinarily
education, is the work of the Muses and Apollo, not of Dionysus. Dionysus comes in as
the savior of education. He comes in at a much later stage.

109
Now chorus means dance and song. Two points must be considered as regards the beauty
of dance and song because, as you perhaps remember from earlier times, people made a
distinction between beautiful dances and ugly dances, beautiful songs and ugly songs.
Now what are the considerations in order to establish the beauty? First, we can say, the
content: what they represent, whether they represent something fine or something ugly.
And second, what we may call the form, namely, the character of the performance. For
example, people may try to imitate a noble man in a noble action but may do it very
poorly. Or to take a simple example from literature, you can praise virtue (the content is
noble) in an abominable style—you know, in a cheap tract printed on blotting paper, or
something like that. And here an interesting question arises which is only alluded to in
654b to d: What is preferable, good presentation of the ugly or bad presentation of the
fine? Both are obviously imperfect, but what do we do in case we can’t get the perfect? A
problem with which you are certainly familiar from present-day performances. And now
let us read another passage, 654e3 to 7, that is to say the last complete speech of the
Athenian in 654.
Reader:
[Ath.:] What we have next to track down, like hounds on the trail, is goodness of posture
and tunes in relation to song and dance— (654e)
LS: Fineness. When . . . or . . . appears, it doesn’t make any difference to the translator.
Beautiful. The beauty of posture, song, melody and dance.
Reader:
[Ath.:] if this eludes our pursuit, it will be in vain for us to discourse further concerning
right education, whether of Greeks or of barbarians. (654e)
LS: This is not unimportant. We are not concerned here with the difference between
Greeks and barbarians. This difference is irrelevant for them because they are concerned
with correct education, and this is already implied in what was said in the last definition
of education, the education of a human being, not the education of Greeks. The correct
education is defined by the nature of man, and therefore by the virtue of man. And it has
in itself no reference whatever to Greekness. One cannot emphasize this too strongly,
because in the ordinary interpretations of Plato the word “Greek city-state” is used as the
key to the understanding. That is not Plato’s view of the situation. If it is so, it is an
accident from his point of view, namely, that it happens that the Greeks are more gifted in
certain respects than other nations they knew. But that would be an accident; it would
have nothing to do with the substance of the teaching.
Now we desire music which is representative of virtue. And we know—everyone
admits—that different postures and tunes correspond to the good man than to the bad
man. Think of the postures and tunes of a courageous man and of a coward. That is the
example used here—or take any other, that is clear. If there were not such a visual and
audible presentation of . . . there could not be art, certainly not these arts mentioned here;
I think that is obvious. But it is a miracle nevertheless that these qualities of the soul
permit an unmistakeable audible and visual representation. And only on this basis is this

110
possible. But there is here a difficulty (655b) at the end of the first speech of the
Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] To avoid a tediously long disquisition, let us sum up the whole matter by saying
that the postures and tunes which attach to goodness of soul or body, or to some image
thereof, are universally good, while those which attach to badness are exactly the reverse.
(655b)
LS: He says fine and ugly, of course. The proper presentation of virtue is fine and noble,
and that of vice is ugly. Now you see there is here a difficulty, because what is to come
out is not only the virtue proper, the virtue of the soul, but also the virtue of the body.
And secondly, which is perhaps more important even, we may be compelled to rest
satisfied not with the presentation of virtue but [with the presentation] of an image, or an
imitation, of virtue. What can this mean? What is the difference between virtue and the
image of virtue? What is the difference?
Student: Well, one is obviously inferior to the other.
LS: Yes, but can you explain this a little bit?
Student: Well, it may be more attainable, therefore, if it is inferior.
LS: That is important, and therefore we may say Plato is here deliberately lowering the
demands which we can make. And?
Student: Well, there is the suggestion here that virtue really is being used in a more ideal
sense than it was probably formerly used by Plato. That is, he now sees it more as an
ideal and less as a practical possibility.
LS: That is not implied. He only says that in many cases, perhaps even in most cases, we
cannot get a presentation of virtue. We must rest satisfied with the presentation of an
image or an imitation of virtue. Now what could be the reason for that ultimately 2 [be,
given that] this is a conversation among lawgivers and not merely people subject to laws?
Well, it is [an] insufficient understanding of that.
Student: Is what?
LS: An insufficient understanding of virtue on the part of the lawgiver. The lawgiver
may, and in most cases will, have an insufficient understanding of virtue. And then no
social institutions, including these choruses, can rise higher because the stability of the
social order is the primary thing to be considered. And then what the poets and the other
artists have to do is to imitate this imitation of virtue. That explains the passage in the
tenth book of the Republic, where the poets and painters are presented as imitators of an
imitation. That is the common case, the ordinary case, except in a perfect polity. The
poets would not imitate virtue proper but an imitation of virtue, that is to say some

111
insufficient understanding of virtue, some misunderstanding of virtue. You see, what we
call historical variety today is understood by Plato as due to an insufficient understanding
[on the part] of the various societies of what they wish to understand. And since there is
an infinite variety, theoretically, of insufficient understandings, that is the root of the
variety of cultures—of caves, as he would put it. Is this clear?
Student: Partially.
LS: What is the point which is not clear?
Student: Well, I am not exactly clear about this business of the imitation of an imitation.
I don’t see that exactly implied.
LS: Let us take the clearest case of the poets. The poets imitate virtue. That is their
function. The poets represent, imitate virtue, but at the same time they have to obey the
legislator. Now if the legislator has an insufficient understanding of virtue, can they
criticize the legislator and present true virtue? That is subversive. Or must they not
imitate virtue as the legislator understood virtue? If the legislator’s understanding is
insufficient, if what he understood is only an imitation, an image, of virtue, then they will
imitate an imitation. Is this not clear?
Student: Yes.
LS: Was this the whole difficulty you had in mind?
Student: Yes.
Student: Is it impossible for any lawmaker to have a full grasp of virtue?
LS: As far as we have read hitherto, no. He is exactly trying to show those standards of
excellence which can be embodied in legislation and which would present the perfect
society. But this is of course not the whole story because, as we have seen partly in
discussing the Minos, there may be something fundamentally wrong with law as law.
Then of course no legislator, even the best, could present virtue in its full excellence,
even if he has understood it. We must leave that open for the time being.
Student: I don’t understand why necessarily the poet must be the imitator of the
imitation. Because if his function is, as you say, to represent virtue, can we not draw an
analogy here to the philosopher, who is to see and present what the truth is? 3 The
philosopher is [not] bound by the legislator in his function as philosopher, so why is the
poet in his function as the representer of virtue bound by the legislator?
LS: Here you must make a distinction regarding the philosopher—and that, by the way,
is a very important distinction—that the philosopher qua philosopher, i.e., thinking and
thinking with other thinkers, cannot be bound by the legislator because that, [thinking], is
subject to the intrinsic laws of thinking. But speaking, and especially public speaking, is

112
an entirely different story. It is perfectly possible that the legislator says—and as a matter
of fact our legislator is seen to say that in the tenth book—that certain discussions can
take place only in a kind of cloister, or you can also call it a jail. I suppose it is a bit more
comfortable than most jails are likely to be, but, in other words, in seclusion. We have an
example, by the way. Everyone has to say in public that all laws are fine . . . And even in
this relatively simple situation there was also a kind of cloistered jail, namely, that an old
man closeted with a magistrate may make clear that a given law is imperfect and should
be changed. That is it.
Student: Then the poet’s function is not simply the representation of virtue but the
representation of virtue to someone, to some people who do not fit into this category of
the transcendent being?
LS: You err, if I may say so, by an excess of sophistication. You overlook the most
simple fact, namely, that every poet addresses his public. Poetry as distinguished from
philosophy cannot be a merely mental thing, if I may say so. The poet produces a poem,
which in itself is a public utterance. Philosophy as such is not a public utterance. It may
become a public utterance; then it is teaching. But philosophy as such is not a public
utterance. Therefore the case of the poet is obviously much simpler than that of the
philosopher. If there are any laws regarding utterances, poetry surely falls under that one
hundred percent, whereas philosophy falls under it only to some extent.
Student: Poetry does, but not the poet. And this is the significant distinction. If it is true
that the poet’s object, we might say, is to seek for a work of art, then so far as he is
concerned as poet, he is unrestricted by the legislature or by the polis. If you want to
argue that the work itself, then, is to be repressed or restricted by legislature, this I think
is another thing than saying the poet is intrinsically—
LS: We come to that. There is a very refined discussion of the distinction made here, to
what extent that is so—but still, at any rate, every artist creates something for public
enjoyment. That there may be people who write poems and burn them immediately after
having written them down may very well be. But how4 could [one] know of their being
poets? Poetry is essentially utterance, or let us say art is essentially utterance. Philosophy
is not essentially utterance. That is, I believe, the crucial difference. Someone else had a
question?
Student: I think a good deal of what I had in mind has been clarified, but I think it is
possible to make the point that when we think of philosophers these days we do think of
them as having a public or professional function, so that we identify philosophy with
public philosophizing, either in discourse, publishing, or what have you. But is it the case
that Plato does not conceive philosophy in this way at all, that it is not a professionalized
thing?
LS: Yes. Professionalized, surely not. That is from Plato’s point of view as absurd as the
professionalization of poetry. From Plato’s point of view that would be as absurd as to
make, to professionalize poetry. I believe there are organizations of writers, even in the

113
Soviet Union; but that is of course admittedly purely bureaucratic, and it has nothing to
do with that. There are not departments of poetry at universities, for example. From
Plato’s point of view, it is almost as absurd to speak of departments of poetry—almost as
absurd, not quite, but that will become clearer as we go on. It is good only that we keep
this question in mind.
Now what I said about there being two considerations regarding choruses—that is to say,
dance and song—the two considerations were the content and the form. I mentioned this
before. This much for the time being regarding the objects of presentation or their
presentation. But what about the subject, the human beings exposed to this presentation?
Do all men enjoy representations of virtue and loathe representations of vice? That is by
no means so. For example, take comedy. A very low fellow is presented, and we enjoy
the presentation. Here the question arises: Is not enjoyment by itself the criterion of
music or artistic excellence? A question with which you are all familiar. But here we
must remind ourselves of the objective of art: men should enjoy only noble things and not
ugly things. In other words, we should strive for a coincidence of the noble things and the
pleasant things. We are properly educated if we enjoy only the noble things and loathe
the ugly things. The noble and ugly does not mean here of course the merely aesthetic, it
means the moral. And that is the objective as it appears to him. Let us look at 655c to d,
the speech of the Athenian there.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Then what are we to suppose it is that misleads us? Is it the fact that we do not all
regard as good the same things, or is it that, although they are the same, they are thought
not to be the same? For surely no one will maintain—
LS: Will say. That is important.
Reader:
that the choric performance of vice are better than those of virtue, or that he himself
enjoys the postures of turpitude, while all others delight in music of the opposite kind.
Most people, however, assert that the value of music consists in its power of affording
pleasure to the soul. But such an assertion is quite intolerable, and it is blasphemy even to
utter it. The fact which misleads us is more probably the following— (655c-d)
LS: The “even” is a whole misunderstanding. “Blasphemy to utter it.” “It is altogether
blasphemy to utter it.” So in other words, this is the forbidden thought: that the ugly
things could be enjoyable and the noble things could be tedious. Men judge in fact as
noble and fine what is pleasant to them, either by nature or by habit. If there is a conflict,
there may be a conflict between nature and habit, so that by nature they enjoy the ugly
but by habit they enjoy the noble or vice versa, i.e., that by nature they enjoy the noble
but by bad habits they enjoy the ugly. What will happen in this case? This is in the next
speech of the Athenian.
Reader:

114
[Ath.:] Inasmuch as choric performances are representations of character, exhibited in
actions and circumstances of every kind, in which the several performers enact their parts
by habit and imitative art, whenever the choric performances are congenial to them in
point of diction, tune or other features (whether from natural bent or from habit, or from
both these causes combined), then these performers invariably delight in such
performances and extol them as excellent; whereas those who find them repugnant to
their nature, disposition or habits cannot possibly delight in them or praise them, but call
them bad. (655d-e)
LS: Now we come to the crucial case.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And when men are right in their in their natural tastes but wrong in those acquired
by habituation, or right in the latter but wrong in the former, then by their expressions of
praise they convey the opposite of their real sentiments; for whereas they say of a
performance that it is pleasant but bad, and feel ashamed to indulge in such bodily
motions before men whose wisdom they respect, or to sing such songs (as though they
seriously approved of them), they really take a delight in them in private. (655e-656a)
LS: So this conflict between nature and habit is possible. What do people prefer in such a
case? That question is here not answered, only raised. If people have a conflict of this
nature, what do they claim to prefer?
Student: The habit.
LS: Yes. That is not said. It is important that it is not said, but it is implied. In other
words, the public pronouncement, the utterance, follows social habit. The problem
therefore can now be restated as follows, and it was in a way stated before. What we have
to arrive at is harmony of nature and habit—what is by nature noble should also be the
habitually noble—or5 a harmony of the pleasant and the noble. Now we have to read
another passage in 656d.
Reader:
[Ath.:] But at present this licence is allowed in practically every State, with the exception
of Egypt.
LS: In other words, the license for the poets to present what is enjoyable to the public at
large.
Reader:
[Kl.:] How, then, does the law stand in Egypt?
[Ath.:] It is marvellous, even in the telling. It appears that long ago they determined on
the rule of which we are now speaking, that the youth of a State should practise in their
rehearsals postures and tunes that are good— (656d)
LS: It is always noble or fine. I can’t correct this translation all the time.

115

Reader:
[Ath.:] these they prescribed in detail and posted up in the temples, and outside this
official list it was, and still is, forbidden to painters and all other producers of postures
and representations to introduce any innovation or invention, whether in such productions
or in any other branch of music, over and above the traditional forms. (656d-e)
LS: “The ancestral” is more literal here.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And if you look there, you will find that the things depicted or graven there
10,000 years ago (I mean what I say, not loosely but literally 10,000) are no whit better or
worse than the productions of to-day, but wrought with the same art.
[Kl.:] A marvellous state of affairs!
[Ath.:] Say rather, worthy in the highest degree of a statesman and a legislator. (656e657a)
LS: What is the model of Egypt? There all poets and artists are subject to the legislators,
that means to the ancestral, because the legislator is here conceived primarily as a man
who lays down the social order for the whole future. To the ancestral. The ancestral is not
necessarily the good. You remember what we said before about the difference between
virtue and an imitation of virtue. The first condition, before we go into any details, is,
Plato says: We must admit the necessity of subjecting artists to legislative control. That is
the first point. And that means, implies, no change: the less change the better. You
remember what we had seen when reading the Minos, where this consideration of the
unchangeability came up. The seeking for novelty is as such a social danger, as is stated
in the immediate sequel. Now what is the problem? The perfect solution would be that
men enjoy by nature the things which are by nature noble. This is, to say the least,
extremely rare that someone is so well born that without an habituation, by his instinct,
he is guided from the beginning of his life toward the noble and enjoys only the noble.
Therefore people must be habituated to enjoy those things which are by nature noble. The
children do not know that the noble things in which they are brought up are noble by
nature. For them they are noble only by law, because the only reason which they can give
ultimately is that they have been told to like that or to dislike the other. But what about
the grownups? What about the legislators? Is it always possible, even for the best
legislator, to establish or to consecrate the things which are by nature noble? Certainly
not always. We must rest satisfied with images or imitations of virtue, and that means
with something which acquires the status of nobility only by law, by enactment, by
convention. What is by nature noble is attractive only to a few, but its imitation can be
made attractive to all or to almost all by habituation, which includes consecration by the
gods.
Now once we have such a state of affairs that some imitation of virtue is accepted by the
legislator, it must be consecrated and frozen. That is what is here suggested. The idea
underlying it is very simple: any social discipline is better than chaos or anarchy. We
arrive then at noble things which are pleasant only through habituation. And that is the

116
ordinary state of affairs, according to Plato. Therefore, the true problem of the legislator
appears from here: How can we infuse into these accepted noble things such noble things
as are truly noble and therefore also by nature attractive, enjoyable? That is the problem.
How to get out of this frozenness which is the indispensable condition of social cohesion.
The problem has a certain kinship with that stated by Dewey in his book, Human Nature
and Conduct, when he speaks of habit and impulse. iii Without habit no society is possible,
but a merely habit-ridden society is lacking something, and therefore there must be what
Dewey calls impulse. Plato doesn’t call it impulse, because not all impulses are desirable,
of course; Plato speaks of the noble or of the natural end of man. But formally the
problem is the same: that without a certain freezing—the cake of custom, as it was
called—society is not possible, but there must be also provision for the other element.
That is the problem with which the second book especially is concerned.
Now let us then return to the question whether pleasure is or is not the sole criterion of
artistic excellence. This is a great difficulty because different people enjoy different
things. The Athenian Stranger gives a long list of them. For example, children like puppet
shows. What is the other example which he gives? The bigger children like comedy. And
the educated women and adolescents, and perhaps generally the whole multitude, like
tragedy. And the old men like the epic poems (658b to d). Different types of men like
different things. Who is to be the judge? The best educated, naturally. The finest Muse is
the one which pleases the man [who is] most outstanding in virtue and education. The
poets are not subject to criticism by the public at large, which is incompetent, but by the
most competent judges, by the pleasure of the most competent judges. 6 Pleasure alone is
not sufficient because different people like different things: [it is] the pleasure of
excellent men that is the criterion of the highest poetry.
We come now to the third definition of education (659c9 to e1) in the last speech of the
Athenian in 659.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The argument seems to me . . . iv This is, I imagine, the third or fourth time that
our discourse has described a circle and come back to this same point— (659c-d)
LS: By the way, you see this is one of these nice things in Plato. Which is the fourth?
Because we have seen three definitions of education [that] can easily be found. As to the
fourth, one has to make some effort to find that.
Reader:

iii

John Dewey (1859-1952), an American thinker, psychologist, educational reformer and one of
the founders of The New School. Human Nature and Education (1922) is his study of the
function of habit in human behavior.
iv
The transcript’s “The argument seems to me” is nowhere to be found in the Loeb text. We
follow the uncertain fragment with the passage Strauss indicates in his instructions and the
transcript seems to indicate with the words “to the same.” (These we have changed, in accordance
with the Loeb translation, to “to this same point.”)

117
[Ath.:] namely, that education is the process of drawing and guiding children towards that
principle which is pronounced right by the law—
LS: Now let us be more precise. Toward that logos which is declared to be correct by the
nomos, by the law. You see here the great qualification. It is not the logos, the reasonable
principle, we may say, but that principle which is declared to be correct by the law. So
not the reasonable principle itself but the law is here the highest authority.
Reader:
and confirmed as truly right by the experience of the oldest and the most just. So in
order— (659d)
LS: The “most equitable” would be a better translation, or the “most gentlemanly.” In
other words, the judges are no longer the wise, say the philosophers, but the most
respected members of the community. And you can easily see that these two things go
together. We have here reasonableness, and then there would be the philosophers. Or then
we have law, and then there would be the most lawabiding members, the most
respectable citizens, would be the authority. The whole problem of legislation and of
political life, for Plato, consists in this: that in fact you cannot go beyond the law and the
most respectable members of the community. And that is clearly not enough. And that is
a problem which is insoluble in technical terms, which can only be solved by
judgment . . . How to get this true standard into the socially acceptable standards. As
members of society we are not allowed, so to speak, to go beyond that. In a way, the
polis, society, is closed to what is beyond society—and must be, otherwise it would be in
a state of anarchy—and yet there must be some manner which prevents it. This manner
cannot be legal; there is no legal constitutional provision for that. That depends on good
luck of some kind that the law and the respectable members of the society may listen
from time to time to a voice from [on] high. But you cannot depend on it. And there is no
institutional solution for that problem, but it is nevertheless a problem. And we cannot
afford to make life more simple than it is simply because that is an inconvenient state of
affairs. So now let us continue this third definition of education.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So in order that the soul of the child may not become habituated to having pains
and pleasures in contradiction to the law and those who obey the law—
LS: And to those who have been persuaded by the law.
Reader:
but in conformity thereto, being pleased and pained at the same things as the old man—
(659d)
LS: That is also interesting: the old man, who can be a very great fool, becomes
somehow the representative of wisdom. That is also inevitable. In every culture, really
high culture, respect for old age, for the bearers of the tradition—being the oldest, they
are akin to the old—is inevitable. And this cheap wisdom which is today so common, that

118
old men can be great fools, is of no great help here. The mere fact that they live longer in
their tradition, say, seventy years and not just five or fifteen years, gives them a deserved
credit to the community. That this is a somewhat dubious standard is true, but it is an
indispensable standard.
Student: Is the criterion then the reason why as citizens they cannot go beyond law or the
respected men in the society, the stability and cohesion of that society itself?
LS: You understand of course that law does not mean here law in the narrower sense, it
means the whole way of life of the society: all customs, public tastes included. You must
never forget that. Law is here the whole order of life.
Student: I was just wondering, to present a hypothetical question, would Plato agree that
should this whole order of life be a very bad one—from Plato’s or the philosopher’s point
of view—or let us say evil one, is it still forbidden to go beyond that?
LS: The point is this. If it is really an extreme case—if it, so to speak, rests only on
perversity—then I believe Plato would say it couldn’t last very long. That would be a
simple case of tyranny. But if you take another society which contains quite a few good
elements and all kinds of bad elements—for example, the old Mexican society prior to
the Spanish conquest, with human sacrifice and so on: surely that is bad, from Plato’s
point of view at any rate. But the question is: What can you do? Can you simply start a
campaign to abolish it? You see, in such a society, that which legitimates human
sacrifice, legitimates also the prohibition against murder. And therefore you have to be
very careful. That is the problem which Plato tries to solve, although he only gives, of
course, the outline of such a solution. That is his problem. In our society we have so
many distinctions between civil laws and other kinds of laws that we no longer see the
problem in its simplicity. But I believe that not much reflection and not much experience
is needed to recognize the problem nevertheless also in our society. It wouldn’t come up
in the form of human sacrifice, but you have the famous question of the South, the whole
desegregation question, and in this you have a present-day image of the complexity, i.e.,
that some decent southerners would not go along with the Supreme Court’s decision.v
Decent southerners. How come? The whole question of the tempo of change and of the
method of change is of course implied in that.
Student: In the first part of your answer to that last question you said that if the society
rested on perversity the problem might not, would not arise because the society would
probably dissolve or end. But suppose in fact in a society resting on perversity, it did not
end. Would then a philosopher be obliged to—
LS: Well, I think we have a good example in the case of the Nazi system, where the
folly, the fundamental folly of the whole thing leads to folly also in the actions toward
other nations, and to a war in which they were defeated.

v

In Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka (1954).

119
Student: Yes, the society did end, but I am interested in the problem of the philosopher
who is in the society before it ends. What is his obligation? Obviously this is not the kind
of question that can be answered . . .
LS: No, no. I think retiring completely or leaving.
Student: I see. He doesn’t have an obligation then to disrupt the public order? He could
never have an obligation to disrupt the public order?
LS: No one has an obligation beyond his power, beyond what he can do. This problem
and how it has to be discussed from Plato’s point of view can be shown from the
documents in Plato and Aristotle. All regimes under which Plato and Socrates lived were
regarded by them as very imperfect. But there were great differences; and the worst was
the regime of the Thirty Tyrants: much inferior. As Plato puts it in the Seventh Letter,
when these Thirty Tyrants ruled, the previous democracy, which he did not admire,
looked like the Golden Age. What a hyperbolic expression, so terrible was it. Now what
happened? Socrates was asked to act as a member of their police force to arrest someone
they didn’t like. What did Socrates do? He refused to obey. And he was perfectly willing
to bear the consequences. But on the other hand, he was not politically active, while
others were. The politically democratic people, like Thrasymachus, had left and
organized a kind of liberation army and came back. One reason for this was that Socrates
was not a democrat, surely not connected with the democratic party there. I think that
Socrates’s rule can be stated as follows: it is identical with that of passive resistance. You
know what passive resistance means: refusing to obey things which are absolutely
impossible but not direct rebellion. That was apparently his view. I am sure that flight or
exile would be regarded as possible ways out. But I think this problem shows how
terribly complicated the political problem is. There is no possibility of a simple rule of
conduct which applies equally to all inferior regimes.
Student: I was just going to add then that from the considerations which you are saying,
the criterion then whereby the law must be respected while you are a citizen, is not
simply the prevention of anarchy or the continuance of the cohesion of the society, but
also an element of good even in this bad society.
LS: Sure. But the question is how to get it into that. You must no forget one important
thing, which I do not regard as the only important thing but a very important point. How
shall I state that? Such thinkers as Plato were very honest. You can always minimize the
problem by concealing the defects of the society, especially of law in the society. You
can do that. But that was wholly alien to Plato. Plato saw these defects with perfect
clarity, and his compliance or obedience, however you call it, was done perfectly with his
eyes open. In modern times we have become accustomed to saying: Well, we accept all
kinds of things in the prospect of infinite progress in the future. You know there are
certain social evils, and you profit in fact from them by being a member of that society.
There is no question about it. Can you do that with a good conscience? Yes, you say,
because I know, or I have a firm trust that this will be changed gradually in the future. Of
course no one has ever asserted that this will take place. There may be a fair chance but

120
no certainty. Now for Plato and Aristotle this prospect simply did not exist. As a vague
possibility, yes, but not as something which would justify their compliance and their
obedience. So the problem meant that for all practical purposes a good man has to
comply with a very inadequately good social order. That is so. That is man’s fate; it
cannot be changed. That was the horizon which they lived in. They did not exclude the
possibility that in a given case, where a man has a possibility of effecting some change
without a social upheaval, then he would be a very bad fellow, would not be a truly good
man if he did not help bring it about. But this is very rare in their opinion. Our modern
experience of very swift social and legal change, this doctrine, can never be presupposed.
Frequent change was regarded as such as bad, the reasoning being: Why should change
be a change for the better? If you believe in progress, you have an answer. But they did
not. And we have come around now to becoming a little bit doubtful whether change is
necessarily change for the better.
Student: Sure, which does not discredit change itself.
LS: No, no. But which leads to a caution about change that was not so easily understood,
say, twenty or thirty years ago. That is the point. Now to come back to this third
definition of education. We have seen the child should be brought up to enjoy what the
old man enjoys.
Student: Is that possible?
LS: Well, that creates a problem. What is the alternative?
Student: To imitate the behavior of a good child.
LS: All right, but is not the child essentially directed toward grownups? Observe
children. They imitate grownups. They know they are imperfect grownups. They know
that. The alternative is Rousseau . . . vi . . . the fundamental problem is this: either
childhood, as an imperfect stage, is directed toward the state of perfection—and then the
treatment of children must be accordingly—
Student: I would agree with that, but he doesn’t say that here. He says they should
imitate the old men.
LS: That has the same status of the remark before, that Egypt, with its immutable laws
regarding sculpture and painting and poetry, is the model. That is half of the truth. And
the corrective of that, the salvation, is Dionysus. That comes in later. But you cannot see
the necessity of this correction if you do not see the full implication of the primary
demand. By the way, the contradiction occurs of course in Rousseau himself. In the spirit
of the Social Contract this would be the truth, the perfectly well-brought-up child, who
lives in subservience to his parents and especially to the grand old men of the polis. And
then the same Rousseau writes in this strange book, the Emile, where everything turns
vi

There is a break in the tape at this point.

121
around, that child who should not even know the word “authority” before he becomes
twenty or twenty-one.
Student: Know words?
LS: He should not even have an inkling of what authority is. That is the opposite. Plato
sees the problem in the same complexity in which Rousseau sees it, only his solution is
not this kind of education, without any authority, but a corrective of authority which is
different and which is indicated by the word Dionysus. But we must see what that is. We
have to go on now.
Now the supervision of choruses along these lines is practiced in Crete and Sparta, we are
told, as distinguished from the other Greek cities. That is what Clinias says. But what
about this practice? And here we reach a turning point in the dialogue. What the Athenian
Stranger has done up to this point can be stated as follows. He has stated the implicit
principle of these old Greek societies, Crete and Sparta, in the strongest possible form,
and therefore he turns back to Egypt, which is still more stationery, still more oldfashioned, than Crete and Sparta are. And then in 660d to end.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Suppose now that they were to become general among the rest also,—should we
say that the method of procedure then would be better than it is now?
[Kl.:] The improvement would be immense, if things were done as they are in my country
and in that of our friends here, and as, moreover, you yourself said just now they ought to
be done.
[Ath.:] Come now, let us come to an understanding on this matter. In all education and
music in your countries, is not this your teaching? You oblige the poets to teach that the
good man, since he is temperate and just, is fortunate and happy, whether he be great or
small, strong or weak, rich or poor; whereas, though he be richer even “than Cinyras or
Midas,”vii if he be unjust, he is a wretched man and lives a miserable life. (660d-e)
LS: Now he is trying to formulate in the final way the content of artistic presentation.
What are poets, painters and so on to present to the people. And the answer is this: bliss
consists in virtue; more specifically, bliss consists in moderation and justice, the moral
virtues. Now he develops that in the immediate sequel, which we should read.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Your poet saysviii—if he speaks the truth—“I would spend no word on the man,
and hold him in no esteem,” who without justice performs or acquires all the things
accounted good; and again he describes how the just man “drives his spear against the foe
at close quarters,” whereas the unjust man dares not “to look upon the face of bloody
death,” nor does he outpace in speed of foot “the north wind out of Thrace,” nor acquire
any other of the things called “good.” (660e-661a)
vii
viii

Cinyras was a legendary king of Cyprus; Midas was the legendary king of Phrygia.
The Athenian here quotes from the song of Tyrtaeus, whom he mentions in 629.

122
LS: I mention this only in passing. The poet is Tyrtaeus, who was attacked in the first
book as preaching only courage. Now he is improved. Whether this is not the true
interpretation, I do not know; one simply has to read the still remaining poems of
Tyrtaeus, which I didn’t do now. Now go on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] For the things which most men call good are wrongly so described. Men say that
the chief good is health, beauty the second, wealth the third; and they call countless other
things “goods”—such as sharpness of sight and hearing, and quickness in perceiving all
the objects of sense; being a king, too, and doing exactly as you please; and to possess the
whole of these goods and become on the spot an immortal, that, as they say, is the crown
and top of all felicity. But what you and I say is this,—that all these things are very good
as possessions for men who are just and holy—
LS: You see, he replaces now moderate by holy or saintly. That is a long story, but I
mention this only in passing. But what is the shocking thing which he says here by
implication? Tyranny is good for good men. Absolute power, let us say. Go on.
Reader:
but for the unjust they are (one and all, from health downwards) very bad; and we say too
that sight and hearing and sensation and even life itself are very great evils for the man
endowed with all the so-called goods, but lacking in justice and all virtue, if he is
immortal forever, but a lesser evil for such a man if he survives but a short time. This, I
imagine, is what you (like myself) will persuade or compel your poets to teach, and
compel them also to educate your youth by furnishing them with rhythms and harmonies
in consonance with this teaching. Am I not right? Just consider: what I assert is that what
are called “evils” are good for the unjust, but evil for the just, while the so-called “goods”
are really good for the good, but bad for the bad. Are you in accord with me, then,—that
was my question,—or how stands the matter? (661a-d)
LS: The so-called goods—in other words, what we commonly regard as goods, including
tyranny—are good for the just and pious, but bad for the unjust. That is the content of the
public teaching. From this, by the way, you see that some of the Western movies are
good presentations. The performances are perhaps not so good, but the content is good.
We must say that. Clinias however, as we see in the sequel, is not quite convinced. He
does not believe that a man possessing all this worldly bliss without virtue is miserable.
He grants that he lives in an ignoble manner, but not that he lives in an unpleasant
manner. There is the difficulty. Now how is this difficulty to be solved? What shall we
do?
We have now to rush a bit and omit very important passages. Now we can say the
fundamental dogma of this society is stated: certain utterances are forbidden, namely, that
the useful is different from the just or that the pleasant is different from the just. You see,
these are grave statements because there are doubtless pleasures which are unjust and
vice versa, or duties which are unpleasant. The thesis is: moral virtue must be presented
as bliss. And this is of course a very problematic assertion, because a man may possess

123
moral virtue without being blessed, without being happy. You remember the difficulty we
saw in the first book when he said the divine goods are the necessary and sufficient
condition of the human goods. That is now made the dogma of this society. And here we
have a very strange passage to which today’s report referred, 7 where in order to settle that
question, the Athenian Stranger engages in a dialogue with the gods, with Zeus and
Apollo. And what do the gods answer? He asks the gods: Do you teach that the just life is
the pleasant life? What do the gods say? He only says they would act absurdly if they
were to deny it, but they don’t answer him. In other words, this dialogue with the gods is
in fact a monologue of the Athenian. The question is whether in doing that he does not
repeat here what Minos did at the beginning, i.e., Minos’s conversations with Zeus. But
then he turns to the ancestors or legislators, and here he is sure they would never say that
the just life is an unpleasant life. And why not? Because the legislator is concerned with
the preservation of his establishment, with compliance with its laws, and therefore with
justice, and therefore he must praise justice, i.e., lawabidingness. And the highest form of
praise in this case is to say, of course, that the life of lawabidingness is the most pleasant
life a man can lead. And the same applies to the fathers when they talk to their sons. The
case of the gods, who do not depend so much on what human beings do, is naturally
different. [That] the best life is the justest life is explained in the sequel, but it is made
clear that the pleasure in it is not necessarily the justice but the reputation coming from
justice.
Now if we reflect for one moment we see that here [the] just is not identical with the
pleasant but only the best ally to it. But this leads to the other great question discussed in
the second book of the Republic: Is it true that the just man necessarily possesses the
reputation of justice and the unjust man necessarily the reputation for injustice? You
remember the case of the discussion of the ring of Gyges: that the thoroughly unjust man,
if he is clever, will precisely get the reputation of being a just man and therefore have the
best of both worlds. So this is a very problematic assertion which is made here and
frozen, as it were. In 663d this is made clear.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And even if the state of the the case were different from what it has now been
proved to be by our argument, could a lawgiver who was worth his salt find any more
useful fiction than this (if he dared to use any fiction at all in addressing the youths for
their good), or one more effective in persuading all men to act justly in all things
willingly and without constraint?
[Kl.:] Truth is a noble thing, Stranger, and an enduring; yet to persuade men of it seems
no easy matter.
[Ath.:] Be it so; yet it proved easy to persuade men of the Sidonian fairy-tale,ix incredible
though it was, and of numberless others.
[Kl.:] What tales?
[Ath.:] The tale of the teeth that were sown, and how armed men sprang out of them.
(663d-e)

ix

The myth indicated is the tale of Cadmus, the mythological founder of Thebes.

124
LS: Let us stop here, perhaps. In other words, the decision is this: regardless of whether
the just life is the pleasant life or not—that can be left open—it is certainly salutary and
therefore the people must be persuaded of it. That is the parallel to the noble lie of the
Republic, this passage here. And here we see the necessity for art is connected with this,
with the difficult stages of the proposition that the just life is the pleasant life. An
idealization of how human life actually is is required for educational purposes, and that is
the function of the poet.
We have now reached the definition of the key content of art in the good society: the
praise of the just life as the pleasant life. There are, by the way, very many great works of
art which comply with that. Many in the past; many more than one would think. So, say a
hundred and fifty years ago, this proposition would not have appeared as strange as it
appears now. But now we have to turn to the question of performance, that is to say the
question of the choruses themselves. In 665c to d three choruses are distinguished,
according to the Spartan usage: the boys, men up to thirty, and then above thirty and up
to sixty. But then the Athenian introduces a fourth chorus, which however is not a chorus
proper (because they don’t sing but only tell myths), of those older than sixty. Clinias
somehow can’t count; he doesn’t see that there are really four instead of three, and
somehow doesn’t understand that at all. The difficulty is this: we have four choruses and
three gods: [the] Muses, Apollo and Dionysus. Therefore we should only have three
choruses, the third chorus being that of Dionysus. This is an ambiguity which goes
through the rest of the book. What is the third chorus? Or what is the chorus of Dionysus?
Clinias suggests then that the third chorus is that of the men between thirty and sixty,
which is the Spartan thing, [and that it] should be identical with the chorus of Dionysus.
And the Athenian accepts that. The problem becomes clearer in 665b, at the end.
Reader:
[Ath.:] That is, indeed, perfectly true. It needs argument, I fancy, to show how such a
procedure would be reasonable.
[Kl.:] It does.
[Ath.:] Are we agreed about our previous proposals?
[Kl.:] In what respect?
[Ath.:] That it is the duty of every man and child—bond and free, male and female,—and
the duty of the whole State, to charm themselves unceasingly with the chants we have
described, constantly changing them and securing variety in every way possible, so as to
inspire the singers with an insatiable appetite for the hymns and with pleasure therein.
(665b-c)
LS: And Clinias agrees without any hesitation. Now the whole polis must charm itself
constantly with the myth, with this basic myth of the simple identity of the pleasant life
and the just life. And yet [here is] a very novel suggestion: change of the songs. You see
that? In other words, the opposite of the Egyptian lack of change. This is the problem:
how to introduce change and variety without disturbing the whole. And this question is
presented superficially here in this form. What is the place in this singing activity—and
singing here means much more than occasional choruses, this charming activity by which
the citizens charm each other into this belief—what is the place of this singing activity

125
for the oldest and wisest? They are ashamed to sing. That men of seventy should sing in
public—how can they be induced to sing in public? The answer is obvious: if they are
drunk. And therefore this is the comical introduction of drunkenness. Then in the sequel
the orders are given regarding wine-drinking. These were mentioned in today’s paper. Up
to eighteen, no drinking of wine at all; up to thirty, moderative wine-drinking; and from
thirty on, wine parties. What is the function of that? Why should those older than thirty
drink wine? In order to make them more malleable. The hardness, the crustedness, of
aging is to be prevented; the hardening of the habits is to be prevented. So in other words,
the introduction of drunkenness is connected with the introduction of change; the greater
malleability stands for that. But what should they sing, these old men, this chorus of
Dionysus? Surely the most beautiful songs. The most beautiful song is different from the
song of the other choruses. That is seen in 666d.
Reader:
[Ath.:] What manner of song will the men raise? Will it not, evidently, be one that suits
their own condition in every case?
[Kl.:] Of course.
[Ath.:] What song, then, would suit godlike men? Would a choric song?
[Kl.:] At any rate, Stranger, we and our friends here would be unable to sing any other
song than that which we learnt by practice in choruses. (666d)
LS: They could not go beyond the habitual, and the Athenian gives now the explanation.
Now this is a key passage for the change in orientation.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Naturally; for in truth you never attained to the noblest singing. For your civic
organization is that of an army rather than that of city-dwellers, and you keep your young
people massed together like a herd of colts at grass: none of you takes his own colt,
dragging him away from his fellows, in spite of his fretting and fuming, and puts a
special groom in charge of him, and trains him by rubbing him down and stroking him
and using all the means proper to child-nursing, that so he may turn out not only a good
soldier, but able also to manage a State and cities—in short, a man who (as we said at the
first) is more of a warrior than the warriors of Tyrtaeus, inasmuch as always and
everywhere, both in States and in individuals, he esteems courage as the fourth in order
of the virtues, not the first.
[Kl.:] Once again, Stranger, you are—in a sort of a way—disparaging our lawgivers.
[Ath.:] It is not intentionally, my friend, that I do so—if I am doing it; but whither the
argument leads us, thither, if you please, let us go. (666d-667a)
LS: Now he admits for the first time frankly that he is rejecting these laws.
Reader:
[Ath.:] If we know of a music that is superior to that of the choirs or to that of the public
theatres, let us try to supply it to those men who, as we said, are ashamed of the latter, yet
are eager to take a part in that music which is noblest. (667a-b)

126
LS: He had questioned the principle of unchangeability, of fixity. He now goes a step
beyond that, but the same principle is involved. What is wrong with Sparta and Crete in
their education?
Student: They don’t account for the individuality of character.
LS: They are herds. You remember herds from the Minos. They are herds; they do not
take the individual out of this cohesive society in order to make him see something
beyond that. So the finest song for which we are seeking is beyond the choruses, it is
transchoric. Now chorus means, of course, a society. Aristotle, in the Politics, when he
discusses the unity of the polis, uses the example of the comic and tragic choruses. Some
of you may remember that. The finest song is beyond the chorus; it is beyond the public,
it is beyond the polis. Now what is that finest song? What is that finest Muse? It seems to
be rather elusive. Sometimes we think they are the men between thirty and sixty, and
sometimes we think they are the men above sixty. Maybe there is no clear age
determination possible for that. Plato answers the question in the following, somewhat
roundabout, way. We are concerned with the question of what are the criteria of
performance as distinguished from the content. We have to analyze song. Its elements are
found: grace, or pleasure; some form of correctness; and third, usefulness. Only that work
of art is perfect which has grace, which has some correctitude, and which is useful.
Now in the case of food and learning correctness and usefulness coincide. The correct
and useful in the case of food is the healthy. That is the correct and at the same time the
useful. In the case of learning the same is true. 8 [Truth] is the correctness regarding
learning and also the usefulness of learning consists in understanding the truth. But here
we are not concerned with food and learning but with the imitative arts. The imitative arts
produce similarities. What are the criteria here? Clearly grace again, pleasure. A work of
art which is tedious is not good. But what is the correctness? The correctness is called
here equality in quantity and quality, and this must never be judged by pleasure but only
by the truth. What can this mean, that the correctitude of a work of art consists in equality
of reproduction? Is this not absurd? For example, that the precise proportions of the thing
have to be preserved in the painting. Can this be a good painting? He doesn’t say a word
here about the usefulness. Why does he not speak about usefulness? That should be clear
from the preceding discussion. Well, we have been told what the useful is: moral
education. But what about this correctitude? It is made clear in the immediate sequel that
poetry, or the art, is really concerned only with similarity and not with equality of
reproduction, to say nothing of other things. How would you explain that? I mean, if you
would hear out of context that a Platonic spokesman has spoken of the finest Muse, what
would you say? Can there be any doubt?
Student: Philosophy.
LS: Sure. In other words, what is happening here is this, that in this whole discussion it is
not clear: Is the finest muse some mythology, perhaps, or philosophy? And this
ambiguity is of course perfectly intelligible, because of the difficulty of philosophy
becoming a social force. Don’t forget the immediate situation, that is, in Crete. They have

127
never heard of philosophy. But the difficulty is this: if the Athenian Stranger talks to a
Cretan, a Cretan legislator, he somehow cannot bring up philosophy, at least not until
after a very long and complicated preparation. But on the other hand, it is impossible to
talk about society, legislation, or however you call it, without speaking of philosophy. It
is impossible. So it must come in a concealed and indirect way. That is what is happening
here. Let us see 668b, the first speech of the Athenian there.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Thus those who are seeking the best singing and music must seek—
LS: That is the finest singing, the noblest.
Reader:
as it appears, not that which is pleasant, but that which is correct; and the correctness of
imitation consists, as we say, in the reproduction of the original in its own proper quantity
and quality. (668b)
LS: That doesn’t make any sense if it applies to the imitative arts, but does it make sense
of philosophy? Can one say that philosophy is an exact imitation of something? Truth
was once defined, in former times, as an adequation of the intellect and the thing. Now if
philosophy is, or is striving for, knowledge of the truth regarding the most important
things, the philosopher reproduces the true character of being. And to that extent, and that
is Platonic usage, he imitates this in his thought. Plato sometimes [speaks of] philosophy
as imitation. But if philosophy is imitation, and philosophy and science are inseparable,
then it is of course exact imitation and not the mere production of a similitude. The finest
song of the muse is concerned with exact reproduction. By the way, then we understand
why there must be a fourth chorus, a fourth chorus which is not really a chorus, as we
have heard, and which deals with the finest song and is dedicated to the finest muse, and
where he cannot say or which we cannot coordinate in a one-to-one relation with any age
group. They may be surely above thirty, I suppose, but whether they are younger than
sixty or older doesn’t make any difference. If you will read the immediate sequel you will
see this more clearly. To judge of the correctness of imitation, one must know the thing
imitated. Now that can be understood in a very trivial way. You cannot judge of a
painting of a horse if you do not know it is a horse which is painted. That is indeed
trivial. But correctness is distinguished from beauty.
What then are the criteria for judging? The judge of a work of art must know three things:
first, the thing—and this is ambiguous. I mean, in the vulgar sense he must know a horse
from sight, otherwise he could not recognize it in a painting. But that can also be
deepened. If it is, for example, justice which is to be imitated, to take again a simple
example, then who has the knowledge of justice? Only the philosopher. And therefore in
one sense it can be the chorus of the old men, and in another way the condition can be
fulfilled only by the philosopher. To repeat, the judge must first know the thing. Second,
[he must know] whether the imitation is correct, say, that the horse does not look like a
donkey. And9 third, [he must know] whether the imitation is well done. What does that
mean? Because you remember in a former distinction of criteria, he had spoken of grace,

128
correctness and usefulness. The problem of understanding that could consist in seeing
how these two triads are related. The one: grace, correctness, usefulness; and the other:
the thing, correctness, and whether the imitation is well done. It appears from the sequel
(670b to c) that the correctness consists in the propriety of the rhythm and the harmony.
The highest chorus must have some knowledge of rhythms and harmonies in order thus to
select what is proper for the various age groups. The poets, on the other hand, are experts
in rhythms and harmonies. They do not have this superficial knowledge with which the
judges may be satisfied. The poets are experts in rhythm and harmony, but they are not
experts in the third, namely, [in] whether the imitation is noble or not. Our highest
chorus, however, must have some knowledge of all three things. Now which three? The
essence of the thing (a term used here in 668c6), the usefulness of the imitation, and the
grace of the imitation. Who is the best judge of the grace of the imitation?
Student: The philosophers.
LS: No, not necessarily.
Student: I was going to say the graceful man.
LS: But still, let us leave it in somewhat more practical terms. Let us see a term more
familiar to us: the artistic excellence. Who is the best judge of the artistic excellence,
narrowly conceived? Well, the artist. Not necessarily the individual artist, who might be
corrupted by his vanity in a given case, but the artists are the best judges of artistic
excellence. That is admitted here. And contrary to a certain simplistic notion which some
people have of Plato’s regulations regarding art, one must say this: nothing can be
accepted by the legislators as desirable which does not have the approval regarding the
artistic quality by the artists. That is the necessary condition; it is not the sufficient
condition. The legislators judge, essentially, of its moral quality, moral effect. The artistic
qualities, narrowly conceived, do not guarantee the moral effects; that is where the
legislator or the political authority comes in. What I am driving at is something very
simple, but I believe it is usually not said when people speak about Plato’s doctrine
regarding censorship. One could get the impression from a superficial reading of Plato
that he would be perfectly satisfied with badly written, pious tracts. That is not true. He
would reject them. They must be well written, they must have all poetic or other artistic
qualities, only that is not a sufficient criterion. What is implied, and to that extent I agree
with someone who made this remark today, is that one can depend on an intelligent
judgment regarding the usefulness or correctitude in this sense only if the legislator were
a very wise man. So the best judge would be a philosopher, from Plato’s point of view,
who knows the essence of the thing. That is true. But for practical purposes the
combination of a legislator concerned with the moral character of the community with a
man of artistic understanding, the artists themselves, alone can supply the proper rules.
Student: To judge of the work of art wholly then you would have to judge as to its grace,
to its correctness, and to its usefulness. Now can one man do this even if he is a
philosopher? In other words, does the philosopher combine the ability of the artist and the
legislator?

129

LS: Well, in some cases, as Plato shows, yes; but it is not necessary.
Student: Then in some cases, lacking this exceptional man, the only true judgment which
can be made is in a sense by the society itself.
LS: No, that is what he rules out—say by majority vote in a theater. He discusses that.
Student: I don’t mean by majority vote. But somehow, if the full judgment requires all
three of these elements, and these three elements are not normally to be found in one man
but only in several men, who make up this society, then somehow either the society is
incapable of making a judgment of the worth of the art, a full and complete judgment—
LS: No. At a certain moment, a switch takes place. Originally he had distinguished the
correctness from the artistic character. At the end the correctness is identical with the
artistic character. So there are two criteria, eventually: the artistic character and the
usefulness. As regards the usefulness, the legislator is the natural judge. As regards the
artistic excellence, the artists, not necessarily the literary artists, are the best judges. The
perfect solution is the agreement of both elements, the artists and the legislators: the
artists passing judgment on the artistic qualities, and guaranteeing its sufficiency; the
legislator passing judgment on its morality. If both instances agree, it is acceptable. If one
of the instances vetoes, not only the legislator but also the artist, it is rejected.
Student: Well, it seems to me somehow that this still skips the problem because of what
you said before regarding the difference between the legislator or the law and the reason
and the philosopher. That somehow correctness, i.e., being true to the thing, enters into
the work of art as an essential component thereof; then the judgment of this has to be
reserved, in this respect, to the philosopher.
LS: Well, in a very radical consideration this would come up. But on the practical level,
this would be sufficient: the two considerations of grace and usefulness.
Student: Yes, but we are talking now not on the practical level but on the more
theoretical level of the full and complete judgment of this production, the painting, music,
drama or whatever it is, as worthwhile. Which, on this subtle and distinct level—
LS: Very well, but what is the consequence of that? Surely you are right, and that is also
what Plato means, i.e., that is the root of the difficulty of the second half of the second
book. It would mean that you cannot have a good society without the rule of
philosophers. That would be the conclusion. But you must admit that it is also 10
practically [an] extremely questionable solution—you know, the improbability of ever
getting that. And therefore, for practical purposes it remains at the cooperation of the
artists and the legislator. Even in the second book, I believe, of the Laws, to say nothing
of what we will see later, there is a cooperation of the two. It looks as if there were a
mere supervision, a mere control of the artists by the legislator. But that is not so, because
the legislator must respect the artistic judgment of the artists. Later on we will see that the

130
situation is reversed, because the legislator, in his judgment of the moral or useful
qualities of the work of art, will prove to be dependent on the artists. That comes up later.
In this primary stage it is the simple cooperation, although externally presented as a
subordination of the poet to the legislator. This is later corrected: there is also a
dependence of the legislator on the poet, because if the legislator is to give sensible laws
he must know man—man and men. But who is the best interpreter of the varieties of
men? The artist. And therefore the legislator has to learn from them. But, in a radical
consideration, philosophy has to come in. This is quite true. And that is, as I said more
than once, provided for fully here by the ambiguity of the third chorus, of this chorus
devoted to the finest song, and the undefined character. But there are some clear
indications that this finest song, this finest muse, is concerned with an exact imitation,
and this cannot apply to any imitative art; it can only apply to theoretical understanding.
Now a few words about the end. In 671, beginning.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The primary intention of our argument, which was to demonstrate that our
defence of the Dionysiac chorus was justifiable, has now been carried out to the best of
our ability. (671a)
LS: The defense, literally translated, the assistance. The Athenian came to the assistance
of the chorus of Dionysus. Why did he come to the assistance of the chorus of Dionysus?
Why did he come to that? Because it was attacked by the Spartans: the Athenians were
accused of drunkenness. So he went to the assistance of the ancestral Athenian institution
of drinking parties, symposia.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Let us consider if that is really so. Such a gathering inevitably tends, as the
drinking proceeds, to grow ever more and more uproarious; and in the case of the present
day gatherings that is, as we said at the outset, an inevitable result.
[Kl.:] Inevitable.
[Ath.] Everyone is uplifted above his normal self, and is merry and bubbles over with
loquacious audacity himself, while turning a deaf ear to his neighbors, and regards
himself as competent to rule both himself and everyone else. (671a-b)
LS: Here he speaks of the effects of wine. That also does not come out very clearly in the
translation. The effects which are mentioned here are parrhēsia, that is to say, a
willingness, and more than a willingness, to say everything. A complete absence of any
inhibition and an indifference to what the others say. In Greek that is very nice: a refusal
to hear, no hearsay in the widest sense; no tradition, in other words, has any power over
them—the complete liberation from all authority. That is the first thing. Now what is the
second thing?
Reader:
[Ath.:] And did we not say that when this takes place, the souls of the drinkers turn softer,
like iron, through being heated, and younger too; whence they become ductile, just as

131
when they were young, in the hands of the man who has the skill and the ability to train
and mould them. And now, even as then, the man who is to mould them is the good
legislator. (671b-c)
LS: So in other words, they become susceptible to change. They acquire that lack of
inhibition; they can openly admit the defects of the traditional nomos; and they can be led
to something else. That is what is presented here by wine. And then there is a remarkable
story in the sequel, 672a.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Then we must no longer, without qualification, bring that old charge against the
gift of Dionysus, that it is bad and unworthy of admittance into a State. Indeed, one might
enlarge considerably on this subject; for the greatest benefit that gift confers is one which
one hesitates to declare to the multitude, since, when declared, it is misconceived and
misunderstood. (672a-b)
LS: Mind you, these were all not the greatest benefits of wine. That is now given in the
sequel.
Reader:
[Kl.:] What is that?
[Ath.:] There is a secret stream of story and report to the effect that the god Dionysus was
robbed of his soul’s judgment by his stepmother Hera, and that in vengeance therefor he
brought in Bacchic rites and all the frenzied choristry, and with the same aim bestowed
also the gift of wine. These matters, however, I leave to those who think it safe to say
them about deities; but this much I know— (672b)
LS: You see, “I know” is emphasized: about the gods, that he doesn’t know, but here,
that he knows.
Reader:
[Ath.:] that no creature is ever born in possession of that reason, or that amount of reason,
which properly belongs to it when fully developed; consequently, every creature, during
the period when it is still lacking in its proper intelligence, continues all in a frenzy,
crying out wildly, and, as soon as it can get on its feet, leaping wildly. Let us remember
how we said that in this we have the origin of music and gymnastic.
[Kl.:] We remember that, of course.
[Ath.:] Do we not also remember how we said that from this origin there was implanted
in us men the sense of rhythm and harmony, and that the joint authors thereof were
Apollo and the Muses and the god Dionysus?
[Kl.:] Certainly we remember.
[Ath.:] Moreover, as to wine, the account given of other people—x (672b-d)
LS: Of the others.
x

In the Loeb: “by other people” for “of other people.”

132
Reader:
[Ath.:] apparently is that it was bestowed on us men as a punishment, to make us mad;
but our own account, on the contrary, declares that it is a medicine given for the purpose
of securing modesty of soul and health and strength of the body. (672d)
LS: Now you see, here you had first a myth which pronounces against wine, and this
myth has a punitive content. And the logos, it favors wine; it is non-punitive. And the
crucial point is this. What is the origin of that madness which we see in very young
children, and to some extent also in grown-ups, and which is the root of dance and song?
What is the root of madness according to the myth?
Student: The Bacchic rites.
LS: Well, Hera. Hera, the stepmother of Dionysus, has inflicted that madness as a
punishment. And what does the logos say about the origin of that madness? He speaks
here in d1, as you see, [of] tēn archēn tautēn, the real origin or initiative. What is that?
Not Hera, but what?
Student: Nature.
LS: Physis, sure. That is the point here. The nonpunitive reference to physis replaces the
punitive reference to the traditional gods. And then there is one more point. It would be
too long to read and I mention only this. They have finished the discussion of music, but
music is only one-half of this whole art of education. The other half is what?
Student: Dancing.
LS: No.
Student: Gymnastics.
LS: Gymnastics. Now we are promised in 673d7 to 8 that the discussion of gymnastics
will be given in the immediate sequel. There is no question that this is the meaning of the
passage. But it is given only in the seventh book or thereabouts. What happened? What
does he speak about in the third book?
Student: He speaks about the art of legislation and the art of primary legislation.
LS: Yes, but that is too narrow.
Student: Well, that’s the political content.
LS: No, no. Surely it is the polis. The first subject is this: the beginning of political life.
Student: That is misleading for the whole book, because the subject of the whole book
seems to be what are the principles that should guide the lawgiver.

133

LS: All right. At any rate, one can say safely that at the beginning of the third book he
presents the origin of the polis.
Student: Yes. At the beginning.
LS: And what they would call today the philosophy of history of Plato. So say the polis is
the theme, not gymnastics. Or could one possibly say the polis and gymnastics are the
same? In this form it is clearly absurd, but what is gymnastic?
Student: Training of the body.
LS: Training of the body. He has spoken up to now of the training of the soul, and now
we come to the training of the body. Why is the polis in a way the same as the body?
That is the question. That is the problem. This is a very important point. Perhaps as a help
I will say only this. In the Republic, where you also have a discussion of the polis in the
second book, its origin, its beginning, there you get the city of pigs, what is called by
Glaucon the city of pigs. And this city of pigs is called by Socrates later on the true city.
And still later on, in the fourth book somewhere, it is called simply “the city.” That is
very strange, because we know how closely linked up in Plato’s thought [are] city and
virtue of the soul.11 And yet we have also to consider the other aspect: that the city is in a
very radical sense an affair of the body. One has to consider that. England xi is the
commentator on the Laws and he has a remark (page 343xii) which you might read, which
is very sensible in his criticism of other people. “To the subject of gymnastic training he
does not return until the seventh and eighth book.”
And yet he can’t deny that Plato promises a treatment in the immediate sequel. The
solution he suggests is, I think, untenable. There is no other clear solution except that the
polis is the training of the body, and one must try to understand what that means. I can
only give one indication. If the soul has to be understood ultimately in terms of its highest
activity, and this highest activity is thinking, then we have to look at the polis in the light
of this highest activity. And then we see two things: that while the polis needs somehow
this thinking in order to be, it doesn’t get it properly. There is a certain disproportion. So
the polis is a strange thing. It is in one way open to thinking but it is also closed to
thinking. If we look at it in its quality of being closed to thinking, it is the body, because
the body is really as such closed to thinking. And there is a Platonic simile for something
which is open and closed at the same time—in other words, which has a very small
opening. It has an opening but a very small one.
Student: The cave.

xi

The Laws of Plato, ed. Edwin Bourdieu England, 2 vols. (Manchester: The University Press,
1921), vol. 1, 343. (Hereafter cited as Laws of Plato ed. Edwin Bourdieu England.) England
provides notes and commentary on the dialogue. This edition of The Laws has been reprinted by
Cambridge University Press (2013).
xii
In the Loeb translation, the page number corresponds to 732e-733c.

134
LS: That is it. These things all hang together.
Student: I don’t understand that last remark.
LS: In the seventh book of the Republic, Plato compares the life which we mortals lead
to a life in a cave. And it appears later on, when one goes through, that the cave is
primarily society, the polis. The difficulty which we have here is this. Partly, [it is]
simply the modern notion in which we have grown up, and for the modern notion there
does not exist a problem of the relation between the polis and thinking, because in
modern times men have tried to build up a society which is rational, a perfectly rational
society. Of course no one says that any actual society is rational, but it is the goal or
purpose. What rational society means is of course differently defined by different people,
but that is the objective of all typically modern movements: a rational society, a society in
which there is a perfect harmony of society and thought.
Student: You mean that the modern utopias are ultimately radical.
LS: It is not always a utopia. It is also embodied in institutions; it is not a mere dream.
For example, if you understand what people mean when they discuss the First
Amendment, the freedom of speech, that there is of course no problem of freedom of
speech. Of course, if there is war or other emergencies, you must institute certain
regulations, but fundamentally there is no problem. Now this was wholly different in
ancient times. That is one thing. There is no simple harmony between thought and
society. Because a rational society, meaning a society in which reason itself rules and
permeates everything, was not accepted by them. The rule of philosophers you have in
Plato, surely; that was the extreme formulation. But reason was only in the philosophers,
not in the nonphilosophers. It was a tiny minority. So the modern egalitarianism, you can
say, is the difference. But there is another difficulty which, even if one has somehow
made clear to oneself what the specifically modern opinions are, prevents us from
understanding that. Because, as I said before, what is written so large in Plato is that [the]
function of the polis is moral education, education of the soul—surely nothing which is
primarily concerned with the body. Is this not clear? And therefore these harsh
indications that the polis is primarily concerned not with the soul but with the
body . . . . xiii
1

Deleted “as a definition.”
Deleted “because.”
3
Deleted “then neither.”
4
Moved “one.”
5
Deleted “of.”
6
Deleted “by their pleasure.”
7
Deleted “namely, then.”
8
Deleted “true is both.”
2

xiii

The transcriber indicates that the tape came to the end of the reel, and that the session may
have gone on for several more minutes.

135

9

Deleted “the.”
Deleted “a.”
11
Deleted “is.”
10

136
Session 6: February 3, 1959
Leo Strauss: Let me begin from a general problem which I might have raised right at the
beginning, and that is this—of which you are aware, as your paper shows—namely, that
this book is not a mere story. i Plato doesn’t want to entertain us. But Plato sets forth what
he regards as the truth. There is a certain irony here, as you observed, but fundamentally
Plato is concerned with setting forth the truth. And this must be met. If we do not take the
Laws, for example, seriously—meaning, if we don’t take it as a statement by Plato of
what he regards as the political truth—we will not understand anything. We will read
Plato in a merely antiquarian spirit, and that means we approach him as anthropologists
approach some savage tribe: you know, they have funny notions about all kinds of things
and for some reason it is thought worthwhile to study it. That is not the way in which we
can understand Plato. On reflection it doesn’t prove to be very necessary to raise this
question of the truth of Plato right at the beginning, because we can’t help coming across
it. And today we have been given an example. For example, I believe, Mr. ____, partly
excused by what I said at the last meeting, spoke of the philosophy of history. Now that
doesn’t exist in Plato. It simply doesn’t exist. It is untranslatable into Greek, this
expression “the philosophy of history.” History would mean the records of the past.
Student: I didn’t say he had a philosophy of history but that he had a theme, a
philosophical theme which was like a philosophy of history.
LS: Yes, but you didn’t leave it at that. You said [that it is Plato’s teaching that] in
interpreting Plato, in trying to make clear the fundamental problem in book 3, we cannot
step outside of history.1 Now in the first place, this doesn’t fit into Plato’s mouth because
this word history as you use it doesn’t exist. Secondly, if you take this terrible risk of
imputing to Plato something like history, you would have to say Platonic philosophy is
nothing but an assertion that we must step out of history if we want to understand
anything. But two more simple examples for what I am trying to say are these. You
spoke, as most of our contemporaries do, of the city-state. That doesn’t exist; there is no
city-state. There is a city. If you say “the city-state,” you presuppose that you know what
a state is. And they say state has various genera or species: one of them is the city-state,
another the nation-state, and so on. Now that doesn’t exist. And this implies something
more. Do we know what a state is? You see, “state” is not such a notion as “true.” For
example, if you find the word dendron in Greek and then you translate it, and [you] must
translate it by “tree” because you are as sure as one can be that if you had asked an old
Greek what is dendron he would have pointed to that thing to which we also can point.
Or to take a still more simple example, the adjective “blue” occurs. What can you do to
explain to someone what “blue” is? Point to it. The Greeks couldn’t have done better, and
they meant the same thing in spite of certain alleged difficulties here. So “state” is much
more problematic and much more difficult than “blue” or “tree,” and therefore we must
be particularly cautious.
i

Strauss responds to a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.

137

And I take the last example: “unrealistic.” What does that mean? That is a wholly
improper term. I don’t address this merely to you; others are also guilty of this, but we
must think about it. What do we mean when we say “unrealistic”? If we would talk to an
American two hundred years ago, he wouldn’t have understood that. How would he have
said it? And the same applies to the Greeks. How would he assert a statement is
“unrealistic”? How would he have expressed himself? I believe I can answer that
question: The statement is untrue. What does Plato or this old American miss by speaking
of “untrue” instead of speaking of “unrealistic”? What is the difference? What do we
mean2 when we say “unrealistic,” [more] than what we mean when saying “untrue”?
Student: What do we mean?
LS: Yes, we must mean something more, otherwise why should we be so glib as to say
“unrealistic” instead of “untrue”?
Student: Well, we might mean that it has practical importance which is not concerned
simply with its truth. That is, I might say that your solution of a particular problem,
though it has analytic truth, does not help solve the problem and is therefore unrealistic.
LS: You are terribly sophisticated. Analytical truth. We are speaking of truth. For
example, I say, “The snow is green.” And that is untrue; we all admit that. And in another
case I say, “This is a wonderful character,” and you know him better and say he is really
a gangster. I also said that which is not: the untrue. Now let us take another example. I
say: This law is foolish, it should be replaced by a law of this kind. And then you do not
say this is a foolish proposal, an unwise proposal, but you say it is an unrealistic proposal.
What did you mean by “unrealistic proposal” which you did not mean by “unwise”? Or is
it simply more polite to say “unrealistic”?
Student: It is practically the same as unwise, but it does not mean the same as untrue.
LS: All right, you say “unrealistic” is used only in application to practical matters, not in
connection with theoretical matters.
Student: I didn’t say “only.” I say this is one area in which we do make a distinction.
LS: All right, I will grant you that for argument’s sake. But what do we mean then by
“unrealistic” which we do not mean by “unwise” or “foolish”?
Student: Well, again, a person may be unrealistic about a situation without being unwise.
“Wise” refers not to the same sort of characteristic in a person. “Unrealistic” usually
refers to a specific judgment; “unwise” may refer to this but it may be more an
imputation again his character. That is one sort of distinction you can make.
LS: Is it not rather this: “unwise” is broader than “unrealistic”?

138
Student: That is what I am saying. “Unrealistic” applies in a specific judgment usually,
in our normal parlance.
LS: But does it not refer to a specific form of unwisdom?
Student: “Unrealistic”?
LS: Yes. A specific form of unwisdom.
Student: You could put it that way.
LS: Say, an unwisdom caused less by lack of experience and less by passion, in the
common sense of the term, than by delusions about what men are capable of. Good. But
still, if we have reached this point and if this is tolerably correct, then the question arises:
Why would Plato not make this distinction? Why is it so terribly important for us to talk
all the time about “unrealistic” and it wasn’t so important to people in the past? Why are
we so much interested in that specific difference between the unrealistic folly and other
forms of folly? Why our exaggerated concern with realism rather than with wisdom? I
don’t say that we could answer this question so easily, but I only state that these are the
kinds of questions which we can’t help raising when we read Plato, especially if we can
check the translation against the original. But you of course made your additions to the
translation, as you will be the first to admit.
Now I liked very much your distinction between the surface argument and the deeper
issues. That is indeed necessary. I shall not go into this question here, only later on in my
coherent discussion of this element of playfulness, of irony, of ambiguity which pervades
the whole conversation and all Platonic dialogues. Never forget that. You made the
interesting attempt to distinguish this, to characterize this by opposing it to Shakespeare’s
playfulness. Well, that is a very, very long question. I believe you cannot leave it at the
Shakespearean comedy, assuming that you interpreted the Shakespearean comedy
correctly. You would have to take the irony in the Shakespearean tragedies as well, and
that would lead to a very, very long question. I can only say that your interpretation of
Plato’s jocularity or irony is vitiated, I believe, by your premise that we cannot step
outside of history, which you wrongly impute to Plato. But let me come now somewhat
closer to my discussion.
You said rightly that one must begin with the surface argument. But I would say we have
to be still more primitive, and we have to begin not only with the surface argument but
with the surface altogether, of which the surface argument surely forms a part. And that
you began with the surface argument is of course due to the fact that you have remained,
in a way, the dupe of Plato. I told you at the beginning that when we read such a book,
what we watch first—and that is really the cleverness of such writing—what we perceive
first is what the people say. That is the surface argument. But what we observe much less,
although it is equally accessible, is what they do not say and which is also obvious. Now
what do I mean by that? A very simple thing which we mentioned last time. Megillus
plays a very great role in the third book. Roughly half of the third book is a conversation

139
with Megillus, who, as you remember, didn’t play any role to speak of in the first two
books. That is not . . . but it is something that he does not speak at all.
Student: He doesn’t speak in the second book at all; in the third he has two long
conversations.
LS: Roughly half of the third book. I have not given it an exact statistical study, but
roughly half of the third book is a conversation of the Athenian and the Spartan and the
other half a conversation between the Athenian and the Cretan. And that is very strange
compared with what we have been accustomed to in books 1 and 2, where Megillus was
sitting there, disgruntled perhaps or gruntled maybe, but certainly not . . . I am not
responsible for this joke; that stems from Woodhouse. Now Megillus comes to the fore.
What does this mean? That would be my first question, on a perfectly surface and
superficial understanding. I think we can solve this question only by raising the question,
is there not a connection between Megillus’s speaking and the subject matter of the third
book?
Student: There is some.
LS: All right, but what would you say? What is the subject matter of the third book?
Student: In a word?
LS: If you can.
Student: Society, in a word.
LS: I agree with you but—
Student: Well, you could substitute law.
LS: But that suffers from a terrible generality, and book 2 also dealt with law. That is not
the point.
Student: Well, I think Megillus’s role is fairly clear. He is in the conversation when
Sparta is being talked about.
LS: That is surely true. That is true.3 Sparta is explicitly discussed in the second half of
the third book, whereas in the former, you remember, that was doubtful whether it was
Sparta or Crete. That is very true. But still I meant something more specific. Now if you
turn to the beginning of the third book, what does he say is now the subject?
Student: Well, there are four different translations I was able to look at. “The
commencement of civil government”; “the origin of political community or society,” etc.,
etc.

140
LS: Yes, let us say beginning or origin, whatever you want; archē is the Greek word. The
beginnings, the beginning of political life, which is of course also the beginning of laws.
Because without law, no civil society, and vice versa. So the third book deals, then—and
that is sufficient and by no means wrong for the third book as a whole—with the origins
or beginnings of laws. The first two books dealt with the ends of laws. You know, that
this sounds so merely temporary—beginning and end—is not accidental. But still, the
word end acquired the meaning of the word purpose already by that time. The purpose
and the form of laws, we may say, had been discussed and in a way answered in book 1
to 2. Now we raise the question of the origin or beginning. Why is this question
important? Could one not say the only thing we have to know is what the purpose of law
is, and what the essential character of law is, and what the origins [are] is of no interest?
That has been said frequently in modern times. Why is it nevertheless important, the
question of the origins?
Student: Well, I said, as you think falsely, that it is necessary to the philosophy of
history which is developed in the book.
LS: Begging of the question.
Student: And this has a purpose, I think.
LS: All right, then let us forget about history. And what is that?
Student: This is to show how the need for law arose with a particular society and the
conflicts that arose in that society.
LS: But why should any particular society concern us? Unless it is the society in which
we live, and then of course it would concern us. But why should the beginning of Sparta
interest us?
Student: Well, the main reason that I see is that what we are trying to discover is what is
the function of law in society. And this is one way of approaching this problem: to see
historically how the need for law arose. And the first instance of the positive enactment
of law is in the third stage.
LS: But still, is it not sufficient for me to know what constitutes the goodness of law and
what is the essential character of law? What do I care about how primitive men or almost
primitive men elaborated laws for the first time? Why should I care about that? You see,
when you say history, you make already a terrific presupposition which is highly
questionable, namely, (a) that there is such a thing as history, and (b) that it is important.
We don’t know. Plato denies it.
Student: Let’s not use the word “history,” then. Let us say as human communities form
themselves and grow. How is this?
LS: But why should that be important?

141

Student: Why should this be important? Because the need for law arises with this
increase, and this runs all the way through . . .
LS: But do I not see the need for law immediately, without going back to the origins? I
simply see sometimes that no legal provision has been made for something, and then a
law is introduced, and this has certain consequences. I see from this contemporary case
what law means: to prevent that conflict leads to shooting, willful killing, and any other
form of mutual enmity. I don’t think that. I think it is even deeper than that.
Student: Well, I don’t know exactly what sort of context you have in mind, but I said
later in the paper that what arises from this is that law has certain sorts of functions and
these are described in the context of these societies.
LS: Surely, law has a function . . .
Student: Certain sorts of functions: educational function, disciplinary function . . .
LS: All right, virtue, in one word. We have been told in the decond book. Why do we
need this? But let us not speculate, and let us see what Plato says. I suggest that we
remember for one moment the very first statement in the dialogue. What was that?
Student: In this dialogue?
LS: In the whole dialogue.
Student: Well, the first one in my translation is: Thus . . .
LS: Give us the first sentence of the first book. I made it very clear that the first word of
the dialogue is the word god in Greek. We could bring it out in English. “A god or a
human being, who was the originator of your laws?” So in other words, these laws or
codes with which we are concerned claim to be based on divine legislation: in other
words, on a certain view of the origin of law. We are confronted from the very beginning
of the dialogue with a certain view of the origin of laws and we must meet that. This view
is tacitly rejected. These are not divine laws. The Athenian Stranger has another view
which he regards as the true view. This true view seems to imply also a different view of
the origin. Why that? Well, it is really of great importance. Are laws, and especially the
best laws, a divine gift as the Dorians claim, or are they a human acquisition? This is the
question as stated. Are laws of divine origin or of human origin? That is of some
importance. It is not sufficient to know that laws are best if they are conducive to these
and these ends; it is also important to know the significance of man in the making of
laws. That is the issue. When you speak of society, law and society (we spoke of that
before)—but that means men: society is a multitude of men, not gods. Now you can say:
Well, we all know that these laws are not made by gods. That is not so simple. There is a
great problem in that. Now what is the difference? Let us look at the human legislator. If

142
the best laws are a divine gift, what is the “attitude” of the human legislator? 4 And what
is the “attitude” of the legislator when the laws [are] a human acquisition?
Student: The responsibility of the legislator differs. In the one case, he is a mere
interpreter, and he is not responsible for the errors. In the other case, he is responsible for
the errors.
LS: Good. That is perfectly true, and that is what I mean. I only would have expressed it
as follows. In the first case, the human legislator in the act of legislation is obedient. Not
only are the people subject to the laws, obedient to the laws or ought to be, but he himself
is obedient in the act of legislation. In the other case, the human legislator is not obedient.
He inquires, he strives, whatever you call it. That is an important difference. In other
words, the whole notion of what human virtue is is affected by this question. Therefore it
is by no means extrinsic but essential to the question of law, since law has to do with
virtue. Another point: if laws, the best laws, are a divine gift, then the origins are perfect,
and the consequence is [that] human initiative, as distinguished from the divine gift, is the
cause of evil. Human initiative is deviation, and that means, if it is thought through, the
responsibility for evil is strictly human. This argument is developed, by the way, in
allusions in the second book of the Republic, to which one must always refer, because the
Republic, the second book of the Republic is the only parallel to the third book of the
Laws, the only other discussion by Plato of the origins. But there it is entirely different, as
you may remember. They found a city in speech; they do not look at how cities have
come into being in deed. That is what we mean by history. That is the Greek expression
for what we call history. Cities have come into being in deed.
Student: One qualification of that is that up till the Dorian Confederacy it is not so much
in deed but rather it is hypothetical.
LS: Yes, we come to that later, if you don’t mind. I try first to state the problem in
general. Surely, how far we can know of the origins, that is a very important question, but
a secondary question. We are now concerned only with the question in general. Are the
origins of law divine or human? Now if they are divine, the origins are perfect. If they are
human, the origins are imperfect, for the following necessary reasons. Men have to exist
before there are laws, if the laws are manmade. Then men existed prior to law and,
assuming that the laws are the condition of all human goodness, men prior to the first
legislation were very bad, very imperfect. One cannot help thinking of the Bible in
reading these things because, while Plato didn’t know the Bible and while the biblical
authors did not know Plato, both authors or set of authors were profound thinkers and
therefore they could not help thinking of the same problems. The biblical solution is
diametrically opposed to the Platonic solution. [That] all evil has its root in man, which is
clearly expressed in the Christian doctrine of the Fall, is the necessary consequence of the
biblical teaching. The alternative is [the] human origins of the laws, the origins are
imperfect. And there is then this alternative. If the origins are imperfect, original men
may have been merely innocent or they may have been savage and bestial. These are the
alternatives. Now we must see what we find in this dialogue.

143
Now the origins in this means the remote past, because we know that civilization has not
begun today or yesterday. The remote past. Which is the oldest of these two legislations
with which we are concerned, confronted in this dialogue?
Student: Which is the oldest of which?
LS: Of the two codes with which we are confronted in this dialogue.
Student: The god-given.
LS: No, which of them? There are two god-given codes.
Student: In this dialogue?
LS: You see, tychē (chance) is very good and supplied Plato not with one divine code but
with two. This bifurcation has great advantages. Now whether that is mere change, or
whether it is not nature in a way effective in the duality or multiplicity, that is another
matter. Now which is the oldest of the divine codes mentioned here?
Student: The Cretan.
LS: Cretan, and that means Minos’s legislation.
Student: Mentioned in the third book, you say?
LS: In the dialogue as a whole. I mean, it is from time to time good to really stick to this
line but we must also take up this line . . .
Student: All right, I just wasn’t with you.
LS: That is all right. You see, that is my revenge for your “glibness.”
Student: There is one question I have which refers to something you just said a moment
ago. You said that men existed prior to the law?
LS: Yes.
Student: And this is stated in this book? This is stated in the whole dialogue?
LS: I would suggest simple logic. If the laws are manmade, man must precede the laws.
Just as we say fables are manmade, there must first be men before there can be fables.
Student: This is a simple matter of logic, but I don’t think it is made clear in this book
which it was. Because on my reading, the original laws were “ancestral and spoken,” and
it is not really clear whether these were laws left over and that the survivors had after the
deluge.

144

LS: I remember that, but I can only say this. There is a certain part of the argument when
the Athenian Stranger says: Now we have reached the beginning of legislation. And that
is a fairly advanced stage. Prior to that,5 [there] were not laws strictly speaking.
Student: Strictly speaking? But there were laws.
LS: Yes, but not strictly speaking.
Student: Not written laws?
LS: No. Not given laws. The other things were what you could call tentatively, using the
modern language, laws which grew. But not laws which were made.
Student: Well, again there is a slight ambiguity in the book, because it implies that they
were.
LS: Let us try to discuss it later. I spoke of legislation, of laws made. Laws which are
made by men or imposed by men. That is elementary.
Student: If that is the way you are using it, okay.
LS: Now to come back to our immediate question. The origins have to be sought in the
remote past. And the Cretan laws are much older than the Spartan laws. The Cretan laws
are, in one word (and I am not going beyond the covers of this book)6 pre-Homeric,
because Homer speaks of Minos. You remember the Minos, at any rate, but even Homer
was mentioned in it. What about the Spartan laws, the laws given by Lycurgus? They are
post-Homeric, so they are much later. But the Spartan, who admits the Spartan laws
rather than the Cretan laws, says therefore by implication [that] the pre-Homeric is
imperfect. Naturally; otherwise the Spartan laws couldn’t be superior to the Cretan laws.
So Megillus is compelled by the fact that he is a Spartan to assert the imperfection of the
beginnings. Therefore, I would say that is the most fundamental reason why Megillus is
so terribly important now, and I will now try to prove it. But you have a problem?
Student: Would you explain your statement that perfect law cannot be made by
imperfect men?
LS: That I didn’t say, although it was probably implied in what I said. I was concerned
with only one point: that if the law is divine, it is at least possible that it exists at the
beginning and that men are subject to it from the very beginning, and therefore that the
origins can be perfect.
Student: It is merely possible?
LS: Possible, sure. That needs another argument, but we have to go into a long discussion
[of] why it is a kind of necessity as shown by the biblical assertion about the perfection of

145
man, i.e., Adam at the beginning. Because there were similar notions also in the Greek
world, to some extent at any rate. The age of Cronos—you know, that is very old, long
before the age of Zeus—was regarded as perfect in some form of myth to which we will
find allusions later. But if the law is of human origin, then man precedes law. And if law
is a condition of human perfection, man prior to law, original man, was necessarily
imperfect. And then the question arises: Was he only innocent, stupid, or was he vicious
and bestial and savage? We come to that later.
Student: If you are going to discuss Megillus’s first speech again, you needn’t answer
this here, but if you are not, perhaps due to the translation or something, the speech
confuses me.
LS: Which do you mean?
Student: His first speech, 680c.
LS: We come to that. That is a crucial text. We come to that.
Now let us then first begin at the beginning. Near the beginning we are concerned with
the origin or beginning of political life. And that means the beginning in time. And then
we have to consider what Plato calls here (676a8) the endlessness of time or the infinity
of time. It goes on and on and on. We never find an end. Now that means there is no
beginning to human life on earth. There were always men. But there was not always what
we call civilization. And how does this happen? Answer: there were, are cataclysms.
Cataclysms means floods. But cataclysm can be used in a wider sense, where it means
any catastrophe wiping out the human race, except some relics who save themselves on
high mountains. That is the Platonic as well as the Aristotelian view of what happened. If
you call this a philosophy of history, you may do that. But the point is that here the
history, what you call history, is what happens between one cataclysm and the other. So
there are n histories. N is infinite. Infinite histories for him. Cycles.
Student: Cycles, right.
LS: Yes, but infinitely so.
Student: Well, I don’t think this is excluded by the way I was using it.
LS: No, no. But still the trouble with the word history is that it conceals the problem, and
therefore I think it is wiser not to use it.
Student: Well, that is why I used three other terms with it.
LS: I know that you are very articulate, not to say glib. Good. So what happens in every
such catastrophe? Every art, including of course the art of legislation, is destroyed. All
political life and laws are destroyed. He speaks then in this connection of the very long
duration of the period preceding legislation, meaning, you have a cataclysm, something

146
like the biblical flood, you can say; and then this, what you would call prehistory, lasts
very long. Civilization, law, political life, is very new. And this is emphasized in 677d.
And it has a very great function, namely, if civilization is very new, then the admiration
for the old, which is so common even today but more in the past, is really absurd.
Because what we admire is something very recent, say a thousand years old, but the
prehistoric lasted, say, for eight or ten thousand years. And there is some reflection in this
respect on the special folly of the Cretans, which we can omit.
Now let us turn to the end of 678c, the long speech of the Athenian, and let us read that.
That is the first statement about early men. That is on page 172, bottom (Loeb edition).
Student: Before you go on: When you say civilization, what briefly do you mean?)
LS: That is a perfectly good question. But I was prepared for that. What does civilization
mean originally? Where does it come from?
Student: From state, or a city.
LS: Civilia. That means belonging to a citizen, or derivative from a citizen. The process
of civilization is the process by virtue of which a man becomes a citizen, and becomes
ever a better citizen, if there is such a thing as progress. Civilis. You know how they
called the civilized nations in the eighteenth century, at least the French; I don’t know
whether this was so in England: les7 [gens] policés,ii the people who are policed, who
have a good police force among other things, meaning they have some compulsory
arrangement for order. The Greek word for that would be which means the tribes which
have been brought into a condition of civil, political life. So the word civilization is much
more legitimate to use in speaking of Plato than, say, the word culture, to say nothing of
history.
Student: Then one would say . . .
LS: Yes, sure. But since the tribes and the earlier forms of living together have certain
important features in common with this city, human beings living together and subject to
government [and] also to something like law, you can enlarge it properly. Surely, the city.
Truly civilized life is urban life; that was evident to them. Whether on good grounds or
bad we must see later. Now let us read this passage at the end of 678.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In the first place, owing to their desolate state, they were kindly disposed and
friendly towards one another; and secondly, they had no need to quarrel about food. For
they had no lack of flocks and herds (except perhaps some of them at the outset), and in
that age these were what men mostly lived on: thus they were well supplied with milk
and meat, and they procured further supplies of food, both excellent and plentiful, by
hunting. They were also well furnished with clothing and coverlets and houses, and with
vessels for cooking and other kinds; for no iron is required for the arts of moulding and
ii

We can’t be sure whether this was the phrase that Strauss used.

147
weaving, which two arts God gave to men to furnish them with all these necessaries, in
order that the human race might have means of sprouting and increase whenever it should
fall into such a state of distress. (678e-679b)
LS: Incidentally, I would translate god here as a god, because that is not ho theos in
Greek but theos, meaning one. And I would write it with a small “g.” One could think of
one specific god, perhaps of Athena, or perhaps of some others.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Consequently, they were not excessively poor, nor were they constrained by stress
of poverty to quarrel one with another; and, on the other hand, since they were without
gold and silver, they could never have become rich. Now a community which has no
communion with either poverty or wealth is generally the one in which the noblest
characters will be formed; for in it there is no place for the growth of insolence and
injustice, of rivalries and jealousies. So these men were good, both for these reasons and
because of their simple-mindedness, as it is called; for, being simple-minded, when they
heard things called bad or good, they took what was said for the gospel-truth and believed
it. (679b-c)
LS: “Gospel truth,” of course, can hardly be Plato’s. “But when they heard certain things
being called noble and base, they believed, since they were simple-minded, that these
things were said most truthfully and obeyed them.”
Reader:
[Ath.:] For none of them had the shrewdness of the modern man to suspect a falsehood—
LS: “Modern man” is not here. “For no one understood to suspect a lie out of wisdom.”
No one had possessed the wisdom to suspect a lie as people now.
Reader:
but they accepted as true the statements made about gods and men, and ordered their lives
by them. Thus they were entirely of the character we have just described. (679c)
LS: Clinias fully agrees with that. So in a word, early men were good, we are told here.
Now we shall see later that this is not the true opinion, but why does he state for the time
being that men were good? You see, he has now met an issue, the issue indicated by the
term age of Cronos. You could also say the Garden of Eden. Original perfection. And
therefore it is brought up here in order to be contradicted later explicitly. Here it is
contradicted only in one way. Why is this goodness not so good?
Student: It doesn’t go far enough.
LS: Simple-minded. In other words, that is not true human perfection. There is also this
great difficulty, you must not forget: if they were good at the beginning, i.e., prior to
possessing any laws, why is there any need for laws? Laws can be an instrument of
human perfection only if men are bad at the beginning. Otherwise, they could be a

148
remedy for sin, of course, but they could not be an instrument of perfection strictly
speaking.
Now at the end of the next paragraph, or the end of the next speech of the Athenian, can
you read that—the last two or three lines (page 177, top).
Reader:
[Ath.:] and that they were also more simple and brave and temperate, and in all ways
more righteous? And the cause of this state of things we have already explained. (679e)
LS: You see, that is very interesting. He ascribes to them four qualities, and these are the
four virtues.
Student: One of them is the opposite.
LS: Yes, sure. Very good. And the most important one, wisdom, is not in. Wisdom is
replaced by simple-mindedness. But the others are in. In addition, he uses the
comparative: he says “more just.” He does not say that they were simply just. So their
goodness is questioned from the beginning. Then he speaks of their living together—
because Plato doesn’t believe in a state of nature where isolated individuals, you know,
just met for the purpose of mating and then they separated and so on. That doesn’t exist.
Man is always in this sense a social being. That [means] he is a mating being and
therefore takes care of the children, but even larger than that, a larger association.
Therefore they had a kind of social organization, a kind of social order, a kind of polity.
And there polity is described as dynasteia, lordship, some lordship, as Homer described
it. Where did Homer describe it (680b)? In his account of the Cyclops. What does this
mean? What do you remember of the Cyclops? Was he a good man? Was he simpleminded? Was he just?
Student: There are various accounts, but one of them is that he was a cannibal.
LS: Homer. The only man we have read yet. A cannibal, sure. And you will find later on,
those of you who would take the trouble and look up 782b to c, we find an allusion to this
cannibalism. All right. Here is where Megillus enters. Let us read that speech of Megillus
in 680c to d.
Reader:
[Meg.] But we Spartans do—
LS: Because Clinias doesn’t know Homer, really. You know, we are the most oldfashioned. But the Spartans know Homer.
Reader:
[Meg.:] and we regard Homer as the best of them; all the same, the mode of life he
describes is always Ionian rather than Laconian.

149
LS: In other words, softer than the black soup civilization.
Reader:
And now he appears to be confirming your statement admirably, when in his legendary
account he ascribes the primitive habits of the Cyclopes to their savagery. (680c)
LS: In other words, Megillus is clever enough to see this first polity was characterized by
savagery. He does not speak here of cannibalism, but that is implied. So that settles it.
Early men were savages and not merely nice innocent people. The first regime of which
he speaks, which he calls lordship to being with, is more specifically described in the
sequel as patriarchal rule. And it is even said here (680e) it is the justest kingship of all—
this ruling of the oldest man, say, the father, grandfather and great-grandfather of the
clan. That is the justest kingship of all, which implies something very important: that all
later kingship is less just than that primitive kingship. And that has very great
implications when we come later on to kingship.
Then there takes place the foundation of the polis, the city. And this we can perhaps read
in 681a7, the last speech of the Athenian in 681a (page 181).
Reader:
[Ath.:] That, while these larger settlements were growing out of the original small ones,
each of the small settlements continued to retain, clan by clan, both the rule of the eldest
and also some customs derived from its isolated condition and peculiar to itself. As those
who begot and reared them were different, so these customs of theirs, relating to the gods
and to themselves, differed, being more orderly where their forefathers had been more
orderly— (681a-b)
LS: You see, that is very interesting. You found brave fellows at the beginning; you did
not find really orderly people. Now orderly has in Greek a much broader meaning than it
would have in English. It is derived from cosmos, so one could say “properly adorned.”
One could even translate it as that. Well, the gentle quality. There were not really gentle
people there, but tolerably gentle, or more gentle than others at that time, which doesn’t
mean much. Bravery you found there; bravery can exist in this early condition. But
gentleness, not yet.
Reader:
[Ath.:] and as thus the fathers of each clan in due course stamped upon their children and
children’s children their own cast of mind, these people came (as we say) into the larger
community furnished each with their own peculiar laws.
[Kl.:] Of course.
[Ath.:] And no doubt each clan was well pleased with its own laws, and less will with
those of its neighbours. (681b-c)
LS: So in other words, a certain group, say, a hundred people, lived in isolation here, and
they had certain ways of doing things which were peculiar to them. And then others, on

150
other mountain tops, had different customs. That was the situation. You can call these
customs, loosely, laws. But not strictly. Now let us go on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Unwittingly, as it seems, we have now set foot, as it were, on the starting-point of
legislation. (681c)
LS: In other words, here is the beginning of legislation. After this union of these isolated
clans takes place, Plato suggests, in opposition to the romantic view which is too
powerful in modern times [. . .]iii could say laws which have merely grown are inferior to
laws which are made. These are grown-customs, customs which have just grown without
any thought. Legislation presupposes thought. Therefore, made laws have a higher status
than grown laws. In this sense, Plato belongs to the eighteenth century as distinguished
from the romanticists. In this respect, not in every respect. Now let us go on.
Reader:
[Kl.:] We have indeed.
[Ath.:] The next step necessary is that these people should come together and choose out
some members of each clan who, after a survey of the legal usages of all the clans, shall
notify publicly to the tribal leaders and chiefs (who may be termed their “kings”) which
of those usages please them best, and shall recommend their adoption. These men will
themselves be named “legislators,” and when they have established the chiefs as
“magistrates,” and have framed an aristocracy, or possibly een a monarchy from the
existing plurality of “headships,” they will live under the constitution thus transformed.
(681c-d)
LS: Now here is stated the condition of legislation. The condition of legislation is choice,
i.e., consideration of alternatives and deliberate choosing of what people think [is] best.
That is the beginning of legislation, and in this statement the second stage. And that
would mean an aristocracy, but that is not terribly important. They could very well have a
sort of king, a magistrate who has particularly great power. Still, he would be subject to
the laws; he is no longer this patriarch who rules entirely by his own power and in his
own right. Then the third stage is the city in the plains. It is also strange that this is
biblical usage. But here we are. They descend from the mountain and go into the plain
(682a), and again Homer witnesses to that—the foundation of . . . And we can perhaps
read that immediately after the quotation from Homer at the beginning of 682.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Indeed these verses of his, as well as those he utters concerning the Cyclopes, are
in a kind of unison with the voices of both God and nature.
LS: I would translate, “are said in accordance to a god in some manner and in accordance
with nature.”
iii

There is no indication in the transcript of a break in the tape or inaudible words, but the context
suggests that there was or might have been.

151
Reader:
[Ath.:] For being divinely inspired in its chanting, the poetic tribe, with the aid of Graces
and Muses, often grasps the truth of history. (682a)
LS: Of history? What does he say of those things which happened in truth, of those
things which take place in truth? Everything the poets say is according to a god; they are
divinely inspired. Certain things they say are according to nature, and we have to
distinguish that if we try to understand the poets.
Now where do we go from here? Of course then we see the city of the plain, Troy, and
then by a natural association of ideas we come to the Trojan War and to Sparta. After all,
it was Agamemnon and Menelaus, who came from the Peloponnesus, who were the
Greek leaders in that war. You see [that] also in 682e10 (page 187), at the beginning of
the speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And now—as it were by divine direction—we have returned once more to the
very point in our discourse on laws where we made our digression— (682e)
LS: That is all we need, namely, what was the beginning of that discussion, of the whole
conversation?
Student: What is the origin of your laws?
LS: The origin of the Spartan as well as of the Cretan laws. They have returned to that
point now, in a very roundabout way. And he says “as it were according to a god.” Why
does he say “as it were,” and not “according to a god”?
Student: Because maybe he planned it.
LS: He planned it that way, and this leads to a very interesting question, which is also a
kind of rejoinder to what you said. Perhaps the poets, who seem to speak only on the
basis of inspiration, without knowing why, speak also with an intention. But this I
mention only in passing. It could apply to Shakespeare, too.
We have then altogether four cities, four societies. The first, the second, the third, and the
fourth. The fourth is of course Sparta or Crete. In this connection (683b to c) he makes a
remark on the situation. It is the longest day of the year. What does it mean, the day of
the summer solstice? That must have some significance. What are the characteristics of
that day?
Student: Heat?
LS: Heat, surely. And what is the consequence of the heat? Well, what do you do if it is
very hot?

152
Student: Rest in the shade.
LS: Seek shade. We know that. But what is the difficulty?
Student: The other thing is the change from summer to winter, so you might say it is a
change from the warmth to the cold, or possibly from the light to the dark—again,
depending on how you want to interpret it.
LS: Still, one could also say the real heat begins only then.
Student: You could.
LS: And something more obvious, I believe.
Student: You get thirsty.
LS: Yes, they get thirsty, and they got some vicarious drink. We have seen that. But
something much more simple. It is a terribly long day, but it is one day only. And what
Plato implies here is this: it is possible to elaborate a complete code in a single day. One
day is sufficient for complete legislation if done by the proper people. Here in this
neighborhood (683e3 to 7) there is an oath by the Athenian which is not brought out in
the translation. If I am not mistaken, that is the first oath which occurs in the dialogue.
But I must confess I didn’t watch very carefully. There are very few oaths in it. That is
very strange. The connection is quite clear. The thesis which is stated here, can you read
that? That is a famous Platonic thesis (683e, the speech of the Athenian):
Reader:
[Ath.:] Is the dissolution of a kingdom, or that of any government that has yet been
dissolved, caused by any other agency than that of the rulers themselves? Or though we
made this assertion a moment ago when we happened upon this subject, have we now
forgotten it?
[Kl.:] How could we possibly have forgotten? (683e)
LS: In other words, this principle—every regime is destroyed only intrinsically, and
never by external causes—is of course an overstatement. But it is made deliberately. It is
the strict equivalent on the political frame to the statement about the self-sufficiency of
virtue which we have seen in the first book, and which we can say is the fundamental
myth of the whole book: that the divine goods, the virtues, are the necessary and
sufficient condition of the human goods, of the external goods. If this is expressed
politically, it means that virtuous rulers can never lose their rulership. That there is some
element of truth in the remark that all these great revolutions we have seen, e.g., the
French Revolution, without some decay of the ruling class and some disunity in the
ruling class, would not have happened as they happened. There are many more examples
of this, and there is surely a great truth in it. But the unqualified statement is mythical,
and is the strict political replica of the fundamental myth of the book, i.e., that virtue is
simply self-sufficient.

153

In the sequel he speaks for the first time of the problem of consent (684c, the speech of
the Athenian):
Reader:
[Ath.:] And surely most people insist on this,—that the lawgivers shall enact laws of such
a kind tht the masses of the people accept them willingly; just as one might insist that
trainers or doctors should make their treatments or cures of men’s bodies pleasurable.
(684c)
LS: That is an indication of the problem: as absurd as it would be to prescribe [to] that
gymnastic teacher that he should make only pleasant training, [equally absurd is]8 the
principle of consent taken by itself. The great problem for Plato as well as for Aristotle is
the understanding of consent as a political principle. Much more evident to them was the
principle of wisdom. That the wise should rule seemed self-evident, but that the consent
of the ruled and of [the] unwise ruled should be necessary needs a much more
complicated argument. That is much more hard to understand than the need for wisdom,
and we will come to that later on. Incidentally, this shows how old and how trivial the
principle of consent is in itself. That was always understood—that there should be
consent of the governed. That is easy to understand. That is not a novelty in any way. The
justifications of that may be new, but not the principle itself.
Now I remind you briefly of the context. . . iv . . . say, to see this already in Herodotus, the
situation in Sparta.
Student: What happened there actually?
LS: Yes?
Different student: Well, Sparta actually jumped on Argus, for one thing. And that was
one of the reasons it didn’t bother to come to the help of Athens.
LS: Yes, that is even mentioned here. But the more interesting case—he doesn’t say a
word about Mycenae.
Student: Well, this is again a case of Sparta’s aggressiveness.
LS: Surely, Mycenae was subjected by the Spartans; they became Helots, subject races.
So in other words, of this great fault of Sparta, this complete lack of fraternity shown by
Sparta, not a word is said. Out of politeness. You see, you would not talk—well, let us
take a present-day example: if people want to negotiate with Khrushchev, they wouldn’t
talk much about Hungary, I believe. But instead of this Mycenaean unsavory business,
another question is raised: Is the sheer magnitude and power of the original Dorian
establishment, which could have licked the world, really admirable? In other words, he
avoids the issue of Mycenae, after having alluded to it. In other words,9 perhaps the
iv

There was a break in the tape at this point.

154
destruction of this original set-up [is] a boon for the rest of Hellas. That could very well
be. A very powerful confederacy could have been undesirable; so that a very unjust act of
Sparta, the destruction of this fraternity, could have redounded accidentally to the benefit
of the rest of Hellas. This happens, that sometimes unjust deeds have a good
consequence, not necessarily for the doer but for other people. This is one of those—this
is where chance comes in—that sometimes good things are brought about by chance. And
this is a very important consideration for Plato.
What then do we justly admire: mere power and magnitude, grandeur and so on? (687a,
the first speech of the Athenian, page 201)
Reader:
[Ath.:] Just consider what one ought to have in view in every instance, in order to justify
the bestowal of such praise. And first, with regard to the matter now under discussion,—
if the men who were then marshalling the army knew how to organize it properly, how
would they have achieved success? Must it not have been by consolidating it firmly and
by maintaining it perpetually, so that they should be both free themselves and masters
over all others whom they chose, and so that both they and their children should do in
general just what they pleased throughout the world of Greeks and barbarians alike? Are
not these the reasons why they would be praised?
[Meg.:] Certainly.
LS: In other words, what is bliss? To do what one lists? If that is so, if that is bliss,
should one pray for such power that one can do what one lists? The answer is no. In the
speech of Megillus (end of 687)—
Reader:
[Meg.:] I grasp your meaning. You mean, as I suppose, that what a man ought to pray and
press for is not that everything should follow his own desire, while his desire in no way
follows his own reason; but it is the winning of wisdom that everyone of us, States and
individuals alike, ought to pray for and strive after. (687e)
LS: So in other words, this thing which is bliss, it would seem, is wisdom—or reason, as
he calls it here. But that of course is not quite sufficient, because we see in the next long
speech of the Athenian (688b) that practical wisdom and understanding and opinion,
together with eros and desire, follow reason. So not only reason but the whole man, his
desire is obedient to reason. That is moral virtue. This is what we should have to regard
as bliss. Now this applies of course not only to the individual but to the society as well.
The overriding consideration for a polity is then wisdom, with proper subordination of
the unwise to the wise, i.e., not consent. Here that is developed at the end of 688e. It is
made clear in the sequel what that means. The rule of wisdom does not mean, for
example [. . .]v or the exclusion of non-wisdom must not be understood in a foolish social
sense. So that, for example, artisans, because they are artisans and not gentlemen, are for
this rule excluded from political power. The point is truly wisdom or understanding and
v

There is no indication in the transcript of a break in the tape or inaudible words, but the context
suggests there might have been, or that Strauss changed his thought mid-sentence.

155
not any merely social consideration. The consequence is stated in 689c-e (the last speech
of the Athenian in 689, page 211).
Reader:
[Ath.:] Let us be thus resolved vi and declared, that no control shall be entrusted to citizens
thus ignorant, but that they shall be held in reproach for their ignorance, even though they
be expert calculators, and trained in all accomplishments and in everything that fosters
agility of soul, while those whose mental condition is the reverse of this shall be entitled
“wise,” even if—as the saying goes—“they spell not neither do they swim”— (689c-d)
LS: “Although they know neither letters nor swimming,” which means two arts which
are extremely simple to acquire. To pass literacy tests and swimming tests is not
necessary; they may not even pass these and still be wise men.
Reader:
[Ath.:] and to these latter, as to men of sense, the government shall be entrusted. For
without harmony, my friends, how could even the smallest fraction of wisdom exist? It is
impossible. But the greatest and best of harmonies would most properly be accounted the
greatest wisdom; and therein he who lives rationally has a share, whereas he who is
devoid thereof will always prove to be a home-wrecker and anything rather than a saviour
of the state, because of his ignorance of these matters. (689d-e)
LS: So in other words, the principle is perfectly clear: rule of men of practical wisdom in
the Aristotelian sense of the term. That can be the only safe solution to the political
problem. But then a tremendous difficulty arises. How would you state that difficulty
without knowing anything of Plato?
Student: The difficulty we are left with by this?
LS: Yes.
Student: We still don’t know that wisdom consists of.
LS: Well, a man of practical wisdom we know. We know that enough for practical
purposes.
Student: What is the difficulty you had in mind?
LS: Well, we had heard of another principle before which was tacitly excluded by all
these things. I mean it sounds so innocent to say rule of wisdom. It excludes by itself the
other great element of political life, apart from wisdom—say number, but more precisely
I think, consent. What did you want to say?
Student: I was just going to suggest that the question which remains is, in what type of
state did wisdom rule?
vi

In the Loeb: “Then let it be thus resolved”

156

LS: That was left open. There could be one, there could be few, there could be quite a
few. You had a question?
Student: I thought the other element you were looking for was educated men with
practical wisdom. A pirate may very well have practical wisdom.
LS: Yes, but if he is not educated for practical wisdom, he does not possess it. I mean no
one possesses it—
Student: That is, these men of practical wisdom have to be made good by education.
LS: That is an important point. The music education is here completely disregarded. That
is an important point. And how would you explain that? It is not sufficient to say he had
talked about it before. When he says they don’t know letters, they are also likely to know
nothing of music tones, and all the other things. How do we explain that?
Student: You mean in this context here?
LS: Yes, why does he completely disregard musical education here? Well, if I may use
an expression of Mr. ____, he is realistic, which means he states the minimum
requirements for the time being, and that means of course that he has to reintroduce the
higher requirements on a proper occasion. But now he is concerned only with the bare
bones, what is indispensable, and that is practical wisdom. Now the difficulty is stated in
690 in a very powerful way. That is one of the most important passages in Plato’s
writings. He enumerates there seven titles to rule—and, as you wisely observed, law is
not one of them. In other words, there are seven prelegal or supralegal claims to rule. For
example, what is the first statement? Father and mother over their children, and then of
course the grandparents over all the rest of them. The nobles over the ignobles. The older
over the younger. The masters over the slaves: this is the central one of the seven, and
that means always it is of special importance. Something of this harshest form of rule, the
most terrible, masters over slaves, is somehow important. Not that you necessarily need
slavery. Plato accepts slavery in this book, as we shall see later. That is not the decisive
point, but this: political society has two elements, a gentle and rational element, wisdom;
and then there is a brutal element, and this brutal element is indicated by the most brutal
form of rule, masters over slaves. The fifth is the stronger over the weaker. But this is of
particular importance, because it is characteristic not only of man but of brutes as well, as
the Theban Pindar, neither an Athenian nor a Spartan, has said. But then comes the
greatest, the greatest in rank, the sixth, and that is the rule of the wise or knowing men
over the ignorant. And, correcting Pindar, Plato says this is as least as natural as the rule
of the stronger. And then we come at the end to one which has to do with the gods and
with chance, and that is the lot. The man elected by lot, that he should rule those who
were so unlucky as not to be elected, also has some place in political society.
We can state the problem as indicated here. Wisdom is the primary and highest title. But
wisdom is insufficient. Wisdom must be diluted by “power.” Now power and consent are

157
very closely akin, although consent is much more polite than power. What is the link
between power and consent? I believe you made the remark already. What is the link
between consent and power?
Student: . . .
LS: Practical force. Say, five hundred men are physically superior, however unwise, to
one or two or three wise men. This connection between consent and mere power played
an important role, by the way, in democratic theory in the earlier period. You find this,
for example, in Spinoza. And also in Plato this is mentioned: the argument of Socrates
against Callicles. Callicles; and [un]democratic rule of the strong is his principle. But
then, Socrates says, if you admit the rule of the stronger, then you arrive at democracy,
because, disregarding artificial things like weapons (by virtue of which one armored
knight is much stronger than so many peasants, to say nothing of what you can do now
with these superweapons), by nature, taking men without special artificial equipment, the
mass counts. Five hundred men can trample to death the strongest boxers.
Student: I’m frankly worried by this business of consent here because the rule of the
majority isn’t mentioned or the rule of anything like this. It is something which I don’t
see how you can read in. It seems that there are stages in the earlier arguments where you
might bring something of this sort up, but not here.
LS: But then, you see, one has to do some thinking of one’s own. That the highest
principle, the most respectable principle, is wisdom, that he states in a statement before.
Wisdom means primarily here practical wisdom, of course. That is clear. On the other
hand, we have also seen a reference to consent. You remember? (684) That people
demand that consent should also be available.
Student: When we were talking about the foundation of the Dorian Confederacy.
LS: But more specifically, in 684c he spoke of that principle of consent and compared it
to the demand made on the gymnastic trainers that they should only impose pleasant
training.
Student: Right. I see those places.
LS: All right. Here consent is not mentioned. But we approach this passage with the
question: Where does consent come in at all? Consent must somehow be provided for.
Here there is nothing of consent. Surely not. But the only answer is that they somehow,
these six other qualifications, circumscribe the problem of consent. Now the emphasis in
these six others is on sheer power. Not only on power. But still you must not forget the
power of parents over children is primarily also the power of the physically stronger over
the physically weaker: primarily, mitigated by quite a few other things, surely. But in the
center you have this despotic thing. And then the fifth, which is emphatically called
“according to nature”—which is not said of those before—is surely sheer strength.

158
Student: That one certainly.
LS: All right. But as I say we have to figure that out for ourselves. Is there not a
connection between consent and power, physical superiority? And I say yes, because
consent means the consent of that large multitude, which is physically superior to any
number of distinguished individuals.
Student: I just can’t help feeling we are stretching a bit for that one.
LS: All right, you can do that. But then you must only say that this is deplorably wrong
and really irrational, just as the rule of law is not in it, because consent and rule of law
belong somehow together. And the question is exactly to understand. Here are the
principles, which are enumerated not in a demonstrative and scientific way: 10 Plato
presented [only] a crude and provisional statement of them, but which, because of its
crudity, draws our attention so clearly to the problem of mere physical superiority. That is
confirmed by other dialogues. In the beginning of the Republic there is a scene in which
the whole problem of law is presented to us on one page. Socrates is first compelled by a
majority, i.e., arms, to stay in the Piraeus. Polemarchus, the warlord, says: We are
stronger than you; you have to obey us. And then Adeimantus comes in and persuades
Socrates by the promise of a beautiful dinner and torch race, or more or less that, to stay
on. First Glaucon is convinced, and Socrates is in a minority of one, and then he says:
Okay, if this is the decision of the citizen body assembled, of all except me, then I obey.
Now what does he mean by that? Socrates bows to a mixture of compulsion and
persuasion, of mere physical force and some form of reason. That is law. There could be
a law that is perfectly rational. Why not? But even then, the obedience is not necessarily
forthcoming because of its rationality. People disobey rational laws. Be realistic.
Therefore, the compulsory element is also necessary. A mixture of compulsion and
persuasion: that constitutes laws and therewith political life as a whole. What one could
wish for would be that for sensible people the sensibility of the law alone would make it
something to be obeyed, so that sensible people really, by obeying the law, obey only
themselves because of the sensibility of the law. But this you get very rarely. An
individual law, surely, but in the whole legal body you cannot expect that. Therefore, we
always obey to some extent nonsensible things, and therefore the element of force is
decisive. The notion of a perfectly rational society, a society in which a sensible man
only obeys himself in obeying the law, was the great hope of the modern liberal
movement, you could say. But, while I don’t want to say what the empirical social
scientists say about this—they speak of myth all the time—today no longer anyone
believes that anymore. And that means that to some extent we return to the Platonic–
Aristotelian view, i.e., that you cannot reasonably expect to have a perfectly rational
order. There is always an element of nonrationality in it. That is the problem. It is
indicated here by this strange enumeration of the seven titles to rule.
Student: You suggested that he doesn’t mention the rule of law among the seven, but
perhaps due to a translation problem or something in the main speech of the Athenian, in
which he enumerates the sixth, he concludes by speaking of “but rather according thereto

159
the natural rule of law without force over willing subjects.” And it seems that he is
equating the rule of law here with the rule of a wise man.
LS: Yes, sure. You are perfectly right. And I should have thought of that. But we know
this a long time ago from a long discussion in the first book, or the beginning of the
second book, in which he identified . . . You see, mind or intelligence means in Greek
nous, or according to some dialects, noos. And law means nomos. And one of the many
etymologically indefensible puns which Plato makes is that nomos is derived from nous.
But we can disregard the pun. Law owes its dignity only to its rationality, its
intellectuality. Surely to that extent you are perfectly right. But still, since nomos is
however not simply reason empirically (I have explained this when we discussed that
long passage at the beginning of the second book) but is diluted somehow, for this reason
the problem which I stated remains. What is that 11 diluting element? The pure element is
reason, but there must also be a diluting element. The crudest and most massive, but by
no means irrelevant, answer would be mere force, say, mere body, which appears then in
human reflection as a form of the wishes and desires of the various individuals and the
necessity of satisfying them and complying with them to some extent, that which we
mean by consent. That consent of rational people should be the maxim. That is not a
problem, because in the case of a rational law it would be forthcoming; but the problem is
the consent of nonrational people, and why this is regarded as a political and even moral
demand is a very great problem.
Student: Then what you are suggesting here is that the natural rule of law of which he
speaks here would refer to rational people under certain circumstances. But the main type
of rule of law which he is discussing in the Laws is not mentioned in this passage.
LS: No, no. I simply made an error and was misled by our friend. Law is mentioned. But
on the other hand, I believe that Mr. ____ was also right, in spite of his analogical error,
because law is really not identical with nous, with reason, and therefore it does have a
different status.
Student: Yes. In the enumeration here, I think it is clear that he does mean seven things
which are not inclusive of the rule of law, and that he identifies later, in a way—
LS: Well, that is a long question, but at any rate let us not try to talk ourselves out of
anything. I have admitted my ignorance, and you should do the same. And in a way you
are even more to blame, because you misguided me.
Student: You shouldn’t have believed me.
LS: But someone had a question?
Student: On this same question, is there not a distinction to be drawn between the rule of
law, that which has to rule by force, and the natural rule of law, which is expressed here
without force over willing subjects. And is not the rule of law to which we first referred
not mentioned here—that by force over the body, so to speak, the body politic. While this

160
one referred to here is another sort of rule of law, which is in fact not possible in political
society?
LS: No. I would say this, that the equation here effected between wisdom and law is a
very problematic one. One could perhaps put it this way. Somehow we act and we must
act on the problematic identification of law and reason. That is, so to say, as Kant would
put it, the maxim of our action as citizens. But it is a theoretically questionable one,
because we do not know in all cases whether the law which we obey is rational. And yet
we act on that. To some extent we are likely to do irrational things in obeying the law.
That it is more rational than to be an anarchist is another matter, but in fact we do not
obey reason unqualifiedly.
Student: This is not a major point, but it appears interesting the way the two words come
together, law and willingness. It seems to reflect the whole problem. Law had been tacitly
identified with the ruling of the wise, but something else which wasn’t the same as the
immediate formulation, the ruling of the wise, is brought in, willingness. And there the
two words are in combination already.
LS: As regards this problem, I remind you of this difficult passage we read near the
beginning that the legislator is the third in rank regarding goodness. You remember? The
extinction of the bad and stupid would be the highest. The absolute control of the bad and
stupid by the good would be the second. And the third would be a kind of—how does he
call it?—a kind of agreement.
Student: Reconciliation.
LS: Reconciliation between the good and the bad, the wise and the stupid, that is law.
But that means also that law as law is of deficient reasonableness. That goes through the
whole work.
Student: Here where we find that law is not identical with wisdom, it seems that the
good solution required something in addition to law, willingness. The simple existence of
law would not be sufficient as a solution.
LS: Yes, sure. Now your question.
Student: I was just going to refer to what you were just mentioning about the other
alternatives. In other words, the consent by all reasonable men or the consent by just a
strong minority. What you mentioned just a few seconds ago.
LS: Yes, but Plato starts from the premise that the really reasonable man will always be
in a minority, and therefore the cooperation of the many in legislation is a problem.
Student: I didn’t mean the reasonable but rather these people who don’t go around
hurting other people and so on.

161
LS: Sure, but that is too little. Plato takes up this question later.
Student: But on the question of consent, in other words, is it possible to think of consent
of the reasonable, who could also be the few and could also be the strong?
LS: Yes, but they cannot be the strong except, for example, if they are the only ones who
possess arms, as in the Republic. That makes a difference. But the first question is the
title: By what right do the guardians, the auxiliaries in the Republic possess the arms and
therefore control the others? That is justified only because they are controlled by the wise
men. And then the grave question arises: Will these armed men obey unarmed men, so to
speak, one or two?
Student: But couldn’t you imagine a state where the wealthy are the only ones able to
afford the arms? And the people who are not wealthy, the democrats, are really a rather
bad lot, whereas the wealthy are a reasonably decent lot?
LS: Yes, sure, that you can say. Oh, that is what Plato means. Plato is not squeamish
about these matters. He in a way accepts an oligarchic, plutocratic thing.
Student: But by the word “consent” would he mean the consent then also of . . .
LS: But even there, surely—then it would lead to sheer oppression of the poor, you
know, if these people can be allowed to write their own ticket. Think of taxes and other
things. That is very hard. But on the other hand, while we may very well say, “Let us
have a society controlled by the wealthy part, old wealth,” and this has great advantages,
we would commit terrible errors if we would identify that with a simply good regime.
Read these subversive writers (I am not now speaking of communists) like Sinclair Lewis
and such people, to say nothing of Upton Sinclair,vii and these famous things which every
child learns now in grade school, I believe: that there are big men who are rich and yet
wicked. So that is not sufficient, even if it is old wealth. But as a crude rule one could
say: All right, the preponderance in society of old wealth is the best you can have. That is
what Plato and Aristotle really mean. But that is a great resignation.
Student: I was just thinking in terms of an accident in a particular state.
LS: Sure. From this point of view quite a few other things become possible. But even as
the best practical solution, generally speaking, it is presented in the Laws, so that
Aristotle accuses Plato of favoring the rich unduly. We come later on to that 12—[where]
he has a kind of class system where the men of the highest property range have much
greater power than those of the lowest. And Aristotle thinks it is not good; it is too
plutocratic. But Plato thinks that this is the best he can offer.

vii

Harry Sinclair Lewis (1885-1951), Nobel prize-winning author of Main Street (1920), Babbitt
(1922), and Arrowsmith (1925); Upton Beall Sinclair Jr. (1878-1968), author of The Jungle
(1906).

162
But I must now apologize for my rudeness, for we have to rush to the end. Now we get
here an examination of the Spartan regime from this point of view, and especially
important is the section 691d to 692b. And this is one of the most important, and
probably the earliest statement, at least of such detail, regarding the mixed regime—i.e.,
this notion that is so important up to the Federalist Papers inclusively is here developed.
But the mixed regime means here a mixture of strength, wisdom, and the lot. The lot is a
democratic institution, the ephors in Sparta; wisdom is concentrated in the assembly of
the elders, gerousia; and strength in the king. You see that these three elements—
strength, wisdom and lot—reappear. The other first four are dropped, [i.e.], the other four
are not explicitly considered.
Student: Why do you say that the rule of the kings is strength, exactly? I can see that it
might have this meaning, but I am wondering whether it has this meaning in this context.
LS: Well, they are the leaders of the armies. And the leader of the army always has more
than his own positive force, as you know. He who commands armed men with authority
has all the power which that armed force has.
Student: If you put it just in this way, I wonder if you don’t miss something that was
brought out quite clearly earlier, that is, that the original foundation of the Dorian state
was based upon three things, which were: oaths, by the people founding the state; by
proxies; and by noble lying.
LS: Yes, that was at the beginning, but we are speaking now about Sparta.
Student: Right, but I think a contrast is being made here showing that the noble lie, if it
is just one noble lie, isn’t the guarantee that they thought it was. Well, if it is broken into
halves, then I think that everything that is said makes sense in terms of noble lies. But not
just in terms of strength. So there is this additional point, I think, which is connected with
this business. Maybe that is the point you have in mind.
LS: No. I can only say that in this passage, after having made the enumeration of the
seven titles to rule, this indicates that in Sparta you have the best you could expect, a
mixed regime; and the mixture means not primarily a mixture of parts of the population
but it means a mixture of principles, we could say. And they are called here strength,
wisdom, and the lot. There are many more difficulties which we must leave open. Now in
the sequel he establishes the following standard, the political standard. A polis must be
free and wise and friendly with itself. And the great question is whether there is any
connection between these three—free, wise, and friendly with itself—and the three
others—strength, wisdom, and the lot.13 [There] would be if freedom refers primarily to
freedom from foreign domination. Then you need of course military equipment for that:
strength, the king.
You expect too much from me. I cannot complete this analysis in such a short time. If we
could sit here until nine we might be able to find it, but we are faced with this awful thing

163
that we have less than two hours, which is absurd. And this compels me to rush through;
therefore I cannot do more than indicate the problem.
Plato gives various formulations of the political problem. And how they fit together we
must see. Then he gives another formulation (693d to 694a) in which he says this: there
are two models of all regimes, monarchy and democracy. And he states now the political
problem as follows. A mixture of monarchy and democracy, a mixture of the maximum
of power concentrated and of freedom not impeded by anything, absolute democracy, that
is the right thing. And the examples by which he illustrates that are Persia, as far as
monarchy is concerned, and Athens, as far as democracy is concerned. He states it (694a)
as follows: we have to seek for a mean between slavery and freedom. Freedom means
here completely uninhibited freedom, and slavery—you see here where slaves come in,
you remember?—I remind those of you who have read the Social Contract of the first
sentence of the Social Contract of Rousseau. Can anyone quote it correctly?
Student: “Man is born free but he is everywhere in chains.”
LS: “And how this happened I do not know, but how it can be made legitimate, that I
believe I can show.” That is to say, the problem of the Social Contract is not freedom but
legitimate slavery, legitimate bonds, the difference between legitimate and illegitimate
bonds. Civil life is one form of slavery. This is of course a gross overstatement—we all
know that we can walk around without chains—but in a deeper sense that is so. And that
is also the problem as Plato states it. By the way, when Aristotle in the Politics says that
Plato contends in the Laws that the best regime is a mixture of tyranny and democracy,
and the commentators jump at him and say that he misquotes Plato, that Plato didn’t
speak of tyranny but monarchy—well, Aristotle in his wisdom understood Plato very
well, because when Plato speaks of slavery and freedom which have to be mixed, the
regime would then be tyranny and not monarchy, kingship generally speaking. So
Aristotle, I would say, can always be trusted in these matters although he does not
necessarily quote literally, but the literal understanding of Plato, while it is indispensable
for any further progress, is never sufficient.
In this context (694c to d) there is an alleged criticism of Xenophon’s Education of Cyrus
(I don’t know what they say about that), which is in my opinion sheer nonsense. It is in
fact a critique of Sparta, if one considers the context. The examination of Persia leads to
the result that moderation, sōphrosynē, is indispensable for ruling. And here we have a
very important passage (696b following) which we should read.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Nor indeed is it right that pre-eminent honours in a State should be conferred on a
man because he is specially wealthy, any more than it is right to confer them because he
is swift or comely or strong without any virtue, or with a virtue devoid of temperance.
[Meg.:] What do you mean by that, Stranger? (696b)
LS: You see, that is not evident to Megillus, an old hand in politics.

164
Reader:
[Ath.:] Courage is, presumably, one part of virtue.
[Meg.:] Certainly.
[Ath.:] Now that you have heard the argument, judge for yourself whether you would
welcome as housemate or neighbour a man who is extremely courageous, but licentious
rather than temperate.
[Meg.:] Don’t suggest such a thing! (696b-c)
LS: “God forbid,” one could translate it.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well then,— a man wise in art and crafts, but unjust.
[Meg.:] Certainly not.
[Ath.:] But justice, surely, is not bred apart from temperance.
[Meg.:] Impossible.
[Ath.:] Nor is he whom we recently proposed as our type of wisdom,—the man who has
his feelings of pleasure and pain in accord with the dictates of right reason and obedient
thereto.
[Meg.:] No, indeed.
[Ath.:] Here is a further point we must consider, in order to judge about the conferment of
honours in States, when they are right and when wrong.
[Meg.]: What point?
[Ath.:] If temperance existed alone in a man’s soul, divorced from all the rest of virtue,
would it justly be held in honour or the reverse? (696c-d)
LS: Now that is a very important question. Now we take the case of the man who
possesses moderation and no other virtue. Moderation is that virtue (as it is meant here)
of which all men are equally capable. Don’t forget the Republic: everyone must possess
moderation, but only a part of the population possesses courage, and a still smaller part
possesses wisdom. So moderation is in this sense, let us say, common decency. That is
the virtue which you can expect from everyone. Does it deserve honor? Does it deserve
especially that honor of ruling positions? Megillus is bewildered. Now let us see the
sequel.
Reader:
[Meg.:] I cannot tell what reply to make.
[Ath.:] Yet, in truth, you have made a reply, and a reasonable one. For if you had
declared for either of the alternatives in my question, you would have said what is, to my
mind, quite out of tune.
[Meg.:] So that it turned out to be all right. viii (696d)
LS: So in other words, that is not enough. Now why is this so important? That is the
problem of democracy: whether that virtue of which all men can be presumed to be
capable is sufficient to give a title to rule. And the answer is, on reflection, “no.”
viii

In the Loeb: “So it has turned out to be all right.”

165
I must skip quite a few other things. I mention one other point regarding 698a to c, where
he describes the original Athenian regime, which was a kind of oligarchy and was
certainly not democracy, and how this was particularly good at the time of the Persian
War, i.e., where the reference and respect for law was reinforced by fear of the foreign
enemy. And then he describes how this original Athenian regime, which can also be
called an aristocracy, how its decay began with the decay of the theater, where it was no
longer the best part of the audience which judged but the audience at large. In other
words, you got first democracy in an art and then the political democracy followed. That
is the way in which he suggests it here. And at the end of this book he makes it clear that
the standards which have been mentioned apply equally to the individual, which is a
reminder of the problem involved in that. The individual can reach a higher stage of
perfection, at least some individuals, than the polis as a whole can.
The end of this book, of course, is the practical remark of Clinias, which is very
important. He has been commissioned to elaborate a code for a Cretan colony, and
therefore he is very grateful to have this very bright man from Athens at his elbow
together with Megillus from Sparta, so that this legislation as given here, as sketched
here, is meant to supply the code for a colony actually to be founded. What the content of
that code is, of course, we do not know. We have only now the most general principles.
The legislation proper begins much later. The problem which we have is [in] no way
solved, and it is better to have no solution than a sham solution, is how these various
criteria which have been offered [come together]: e.g., the various titles to rule; and then
the elements of a mixed regime (strength, wisdom and the lot); and then the other criteria
(wisdom, freedom and harmony, the city must be friendly with itself); and the mean
between monarchy and democracy 14. I am sure they mean the same thing, but that has to
be stated and found out by a thorough analysis. The main point, however, which I think
should have become clear, is this: that mere reason, reason by itself, is not sufficient for
ruling society. Another element is needed, which we can very well call to begin with
consent—which means, of course, consent to the proposals of the wise by people who are
not wise, nd that is a very great problem. And you can perhaps say [that] when Plato says
later on that we ourselves as legislators, we are the tragedy, meaning we don’t need other
tragedies, perhaps he means that. To this extent the polis is essentially a tragic thing,
meaning, confronted with an insoluble problem. And yet in a way the problem is in fact
solved in every tolerably decent society, but it is never elegant, what the mathematicians
would call an elegant solution, a universally valid and absolutely cogent solution. It is a
defective solution. And we see the whole issue of freedom is of course involved, because
what we ordinarily mean by freedom is that precisely, consent; so that no one is subject
to a law in the making of which he does not have some influence, however indirect, by
voting and so on. And we see it if we compare it with regimes in which there is no voting
whatever, no free elections whatever.

1

Deleted “is Plato’s teaching.”
Deleted “more.”
3
Deleted “When.”
2

166

4

Deleted “if the best laws are a divine gift, what is the attitude of the human legislator if the laws are a
divine gift?”
5
Deleted “they.”
6
Deleted “are.”
7
Deleted “people.”
8
Changed from “it is as absurd as.”
9
Moved “is.”
10
Deleted “but.”
11
Deleted “element diluting, the.”
12
Deleted “when.”
13
Deleted “it.”
14
Moved “come together.”

167
Session 7: February 5, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —especially the point which you put at the end, that was very
neatly stated: that an agreement between man and law, because of a certain disproportion
between man and law, [is] to be brought about especially by the prelude. i There are only
a few points which I would like to mention where I do not quite agree with you. As to the
first, you say, “Why does he stress the given condition?” And you say it is meant from
the outset to be an adaptation to conditions which were not too favorable. I do not believe
that this is so, because I think he presents here truly the best favorable conditions.
Student: I mean not “best” in the sense of, say, in the Republic where they choose what
would be the best, the most desired circumstances.
LS: But there they disregard, so to speak, all conditions, e.g., the question of territory and
so on.
Student: But the site which they choose the Athenian thinks is not perfectly good. For
instance, he makes the comment: “Yet the land is still only 80 stadia from the sea.”
LS: But in the Republic there is no reflection whatsoever of this nature. In the Republic
they consider only the conditions of the human soul, perhaps of the human body, but not
more. Good. Now you rightly stated that these conditions are nonpolitical. That is crucial.
The political has not to do with the conditions as such, but what is to be made with the
conditions on the basis of them. And yet the conditions are not causes in the sense that
they determine the superstructure: the conditions are like material, the wood for the
carpenter. And as little as you can explain the table by the nature of the wood, as little can
you explain the political set-up by the natural conditions. But nevertheless they are
conditions; therefore the political set-up cannot be in contradiction to them. What I found
least clear in your statement was this comment regarding the three things: chance, god
and art.
Student: The argument?
LS: Your comment about it. I mean, the statement is not without difficulty in Plato, that
is certain. But you said it is not demonstrated that art can affect chance.
Student: I say art in fact does complement chance. Maybe we are deluded in thinking the
artisan really—
LS: But take a very simple case: a very skilled physician and a very stupid physician
confronted with something wholly unexpected, e.g., that the disease doesn’t run its
ordinary course [and] it has never been observed or never been described in scientific
i

Strauss responds to a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.

168
papers. Now the very intelligent physician might very well be able to handle this
unforeseen event.
Student: Is it the case that he is doing it or rather some blind circumstances working in
the world?
LS: He grasps the situation, and this grasping, this act of the light in man—that is the
opposite of chance—makes it possible to counteract chance. So I believe one cannot say
that it has not been demonstrated, that no special demonstration is necessary. We see this
all the time, that some people are completely bewildered.
Student: I agree with the commonsense distinctions, but he says they are true right off
without making any attempt to—
LS: Well . . .
Student: And it is a pretty important thing.
LS: Sure, but that art does play a role and provision, human provision, is I think as
undeniable as that there are trees. Unless you want to start from a premise of complete
skepticism, out of which you can probably never get anywhere.
Now when you said the true law has to do with the common good—and that is surely
what he says—you mentioned that it is not very precise and detailed. That is certainly
true, but is it not sufficient for the purpose because the problem here is not public good
and private good but the common good or sectional good. Now the common good is
opposed to sectional good. That is the point under consideration here. Now of course the
questions come back: What about the sectional goods which exist, e.g., that the farmers
have a different interest than the urban people, and so on? Now what would then be the
common good in the light of the sectional goods? Not everything is sectional, of course—
national defense is not sectional—but other things are sectional. What would be the
common good from Plato’s point of view, with a view to the sectional goods? Well, a
general answer is possible. You have to consider the relative significance and dignity of
the various sections, and to give more to the section of higher significance—what the
criteria are is another matter. But that is formally the character of the answer. And the
question is whether, if you make this admission, as Plato does, you do not have to make
allowance for the sections in the legislative body, for example. And that is what Plato in
fact does later on when he speaks about the polity in detail.
There is one point where I may be wrong, or the difficulty may be merely verbal or
linguistic: “Law must be arbitrary.” This is certainly not Plato’s expression. Law must
command, surely. But that means it must also provide for punishments. He doesn’t say
that is arbitrary.
Student: No. Prescriptions are somewhat arbitrary. Do you recall the context where I
used the word “arbitrary”?

169

LS: No. But I would say, for example, that if a doctor says, “Take two aspirin” and
doesn’t give any reason, I would not say that is an arbitrary act. It might be arbitrary
because he gets some payment from Bayer and Company and therefore takes aspirin and
not Bufferin. I don’t know whether such things happen. But assuming that he is an honest
man, I would not say this is arbitrary. It is his best conviction based on . . .
Student: . . . the size of the funeral, to determine what is large, to determine the quality
in terms of quantity, becomes an arbitrary matter.
LS: No, the objection of Plato is not that this provision as it is now is arbitrary, but that it
is vague. If the legislator says funerals should be moderate and the people have very
different opinions about what is a moderate funeral, then the lawgiver in a way doesn’t
say anything. And therefore he has to say [that] no funeral must cost more than that, or
maybe less than that, in order to prevent neglect of the parents.
Now these were the particular points I wanted to mention. Otherwise it was a very clear
paper. Now let us turn to the book as a whole. We are here confronted with a city to be
founded in Crete, and since Clinias is an important member of that commission, Clinias is
the chief interlocutor in this book. Megillus comes up only twice. Now there is then a
fundamental difference between books 4 [and] following and the first three books. In the
first three books we had an examination of the old laws, of the established laws, and in
this context the standards were elaborated: the ends of law, the essential character of law,
and the origin of law. And from this there could emerge—from this theoretical discussion
there could emerge the demand for a code which would be in agreement with these
standards. But that is not the way in which Plato proceeds. Plato makes this quest for the
new code, for a code in agreement with his standards, dependent on the practical need
here and now for that. They sent out a new colony and want to found a new city;
therefore, a new code. Why does he do that? Why does he not say that after they have
found out the right standards, let us now see how a code would look. Why does he bring
in this apparently irrelevant thing that they need a new code?
Student: The fact that codes are things which may be good or bad, but which in any case
are not to be changed lightly.
LS: Yes, but we have found out that the old code isn’t good.
Student: But we can grant this and still say that to mess it up at this time might make
things even worse.
LS: I see. It is implied then that there should be no changes in the old cities. But here we
have a god-sent opportunity where we can give a good code. Yes, that is a very good
point. But one other point also must not be forgotten: that since they are now—even the
Athenian Stranger—acting as a legislator, [even] if by remote control, 1 they therefore
have now a much greater responsibility than in the more theoretical first three books.
This is bound to have consequences.

170

Now the book can be divided into three parts, although it might easily be [divided] into
the two parts, as suggested in today’s paper. I believe it is simpler to say in three parts:
first, the conditions; second, the political order, the regime; and third, the laws. Now to
take the first, this falls under the heading chance and art. Certain things have to be given,
and it does not depend upon human activity whether they are supplied or not. It is a
matter of chance whether they are supplied, and then what human art can do with that.
Regarding these given conditions, he distinguishes two: the nature of the territory and the
character of the populace. And then the other thing, where chance also enters, is how do
they get the power, the political power, the power over men, to get the new code across.
The best solution is said to be completely concentrated power, i.e., tyranny, but a tyranny
guided by a wise legislator. We will take this up later on.
Then we turn to the politeia, to the regime. And the general answer is this: the good order
cannot be the rule of men, whoever they may be, it can only be the rule of god. But this
must be broadly understood: the rule of the godly, of the divine in men, i.e., reason. And
this goes on then to the last step, rule of law. The rule of god is, in a way, the rule of law.
Rule of law and not of men—the famous formula. From this a grave consequence
follows. The moral virtue determining the whole society must be moderation or
temperance (you remember the discussion of this virtue we had last time) and this
moderation, being obedience to law and therewith to god, insensibly changes into piety,
reverence for the gods and also for the parents. You remember the Minos: sacrifices and
funerals. And it is no accident that the key example by which the Stranger makes clear
the character of good laws is taken from funerals. That is the whole issue of the ancestors
and therewith indirectly of the gods. Now regarding the laws, the decisive question is:
Should they be mere commands, or should they also contain persuasion? And the answer
is that they must contain persuasion, and these are called preludes or proems. This much
about the structure of the book as a whole.
Now let us turn to the text, and first read in the beginning (705c) the speech of Clinias.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, then, how is our district off for timber for ship-building?
[Clin.:] There is no fir to speak of, nor pine, and but little cypress; nor could one find
much larch or plane, which shipwrights are always obliged to use for the interior fittings
of ships.
[Ath.:] Those, too, are natural features which would not be bad for the country.
[Clin.:] Why so?
[Ath.:] That a State should not find it easy to copy its enemies in bad habits is a good
thing. (705c-d)
LS: I have probably pointed to the wrong passage, but I can’t find the right one now in
the rush. But the main point here in the argument is this: it is not good to live close to the
sea. The distance is ten miles, and that is just tolerable. Ten miles means much more
when there are no cars than would otherwise be the case. But why this distrust of the sea?
Why this distrust of the sea? Why should one live inland?

171

Student: To keep away from innovation.
LS: But that is not stressed here. What is stressed here is the bad effect regarding virtue.
Student: The tendency toward trade.
LS: Trade. That is the point here. Trade has a bad moral effect.
Student: I’d like to take that a little further. Is there any more general significance about
this external trade? He doesn’t mind some kind of internal trade.
LS: A bit, sure. You have too many cows and too much milk and butter, and on the other
hand your neighbor has more hens. But that is barter. But maybe the other fellow lives in
the next village and someone takes care of bringing the surplus of village A to village B
and vice versa. That is no problem.
Student: But would the external trade in a sense destroy the moral self-sufficiency?
LS: Some foreign trade is inevitable. For example, you may not have enough timber, or
you may lack salt. Think how important salt is for many purposes—salting flesh and so
on. And not all districts of the world are sufficiently supplied with salt, and others are not
sufficiently supplied with timber. Men cannot have the minimum of well-being needed if
there is not some exchange, because of the unequal distribution of these things. But the
question is what is its place in society. Must it be predominant or must it have a strictly
subordinate place? These are the extremes. And Plato’s answer [is]: strictly subordinate.
And why? What is the bad effect of these things?
Student: That is what I was, in a sense, asking.
LS: He says so (705a 4 to 7), [in] the long statement of the Athenian. The main point he
makes there is this: trade destroys good faith and friendship. Why?
Student: Well, it would destroy good faith if people were only interested in making a
profit, because you would even go to the extent of not keeping your contracts.
LS: Yes, but then you can have a very effective law. I admit that this very effective law
will produce very effective lawyers.
Student: Well, the mere idea of making the profit by trading and giving somebody
something for which you get value in return, but more value than it is absolutely worth.
In a sense, you are cheating this person.
LS: But could you not say that the fellow who brings the eggs from village A to village B
ten miles away has really a lot of trouble? He must collect them first, and then he must
feed his horse and so on. This creates a problem. Now I think if we start from one thing

172
with which we are familiar—how do we call a commercial society, I mean a society in
which commerce predominates? We also call it a competitive society. Competition, that
is the problem. You see, the farmer as farmer does not, nor is [he] compelled to compete.
He may do that, but that is his own fault; he doesn’t have to. He doesn’t have to look at
what the other fellow is doing. He may do it, but that is his fault. And this is, I think, the
basic point: competition is as such a danger to good faith and friendship. That applies not
only to commercial competition, of course, but it is no accident that when we speak of
competition we think primarily of commercial competition and not of competition for
prizes at a county fair, or an examination.
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, sure, and that he comes to later. But this was the first point. This was a fairly
common view among the moralists of former ages. It has changed completely in modern
times, and if one wants to understand that change one would have to study above all
Locke and Montesquieu, who are, I believe, the greatest representatives of this new
change, the justification of competition, as we can say.
Now he also refers to the bad effect of gold and silver. That is only another aspect of the
same problem. At this point we observe (705e, beginning):
Reader:
[Ath.]: So do you now, in turn, keep a watch on my present law-making, as you follow it,
in case I should enact any law either not tending to virtue at all, or tending only to a part
of it. (705e)
LS: That is all we need. You see, the Athenian is now the legislator, and there is no
pretence to divine inspiration. It is a human being who is the legislator. Now in the sequel
the whole question of the navy comes up, and here we get a reminder of the old enmity
between Athens and Crete, the story of Minos, of which we have read in the Minos. Now
the Athenians couldn’t defeat Minos, who was the ruler of the sea. But these old
Athenians did not imitate Minos, i.e., they did not become a seafaring nation. Having a
navy is productive of disgraceful habits, as Homer’s Odysseus testifies. And then the
quotation from Homer. Yet in such cases one must also look at the Odyssey and not
merely look at what Plato happens to quote, and we see that Odysseus praises the
opposite, you know, on certain occasions. So Homer is at any rate not an unambiguous
witness to that. One thing is clear—that is the Athenian experience to which you referred.
When Athens became a seafaring power after the Persian War, they had to use the scum
of the population, the people who were wholly unfit for military service proper, as
sailors. This could be done without any military qualities; it requires mere physical force.
But in order to keep them loyal, they had to receive political power. So the beginning of
democracy, of radical democracy, in Athens is identical with Athens becoming a naval
power.
But this is not the only story. What is involved in that whole question of the sea, of which
we are reminded of by Odysseus? You see, Odysseus is in Homer the presentation of the

173
wiliest of men, and that means in the older notion almost the same as the wisest of men.
Now at the beginning of the Odyssey he is described as a man who has seen the customs
and learned the thoughts of all kinds of nations. There is a connection between his
wisdom, the emancipation of his mind, and his traveling, and that is a theme which goes
through Greek thought. One can say this from a merely historical point of view: traveling
is a condition of philosophy, becoming aware of the arbitrary character of the local
opinions. But while this is a very great advantage for the mind, it is a great danger for the
society, because if people become aware of the “relativity” ii of their customs and myths,
this serves as a disintegrating force. You have it now as a problem of the underdeveloped
countries whose whole social order is endangered by the intercourse with strangers. And
therefore the question of travelling will play a role in this book. Later on we will get very
severe prescriptions, much stricter than those for which Secretary of State Dulles iii has
been accused. You must have very high qualifications to get a passport in Plato’s Laws.
This is a simple example of the great cleavage between the requirements of the mind and
the requirements of society, and we must keep this in mind. But at any rate, the Athenian
in this part of the argument limits himself to the crude political consideration that Athens,
the old aristocratic Athens, was destroyed by naval power. In Athens the democracy was
imperialistic; the old-fashioned people were isolationists. These things change from time
to time. Clinias, however, is a descendant from Minos. He defends the navy and says
[that] Salamis, the naval battle of Salamis, saved Greece. But here the Athenian and
Megillus unite against the Cretan. It was not Salamis but the land battles of Marathon and
Plataea which saved Greece. We turn then to 707d (page 265):
Reader:
[Ath.:] Since, however, our present object is political excellence—
LS: More precisely, “the excellence of the polity.”
Reader:
it is the natural character of a country and its legal arrangements that we are considering;
so that we differ from most people in not regarding mere safety and existence as the most
precious thing men can possess, but rather the gaining of all possible goodness and the
keeping of it throughout life. This too, I believe, was stated by us before. (707d)
LS: So here he states the standard again, but with this change: it is the goodness of the
virtue of the polity. That is the standard. It is not simply the virtue of man; and whether it
is altogether the same remains to be seen. With a view to the goodness of the polity, we
consider first the nature of the territory, a term used here, and the order of the laws. And
ii

Quotation marks are in the original transcript; Strauss might have said “quote relativity
unquote.”
iii
John Foster Dulles was Secretary of State in the Eisenhower administrations during the Cold
War. Strauss is referring to the case of Rockwell Kent, an American artist, who was denied a
passport on the grounds that he was a communist. In Kent v. Dulles (1958), the Supreme Court
found that the right to travel is part of the liberty protected by the Fifth Amendment’s due process
clause, and that the secretary of state had exceeded his authority by refusing to issue passports to
communists.

174
the goal is not mere being, which includes political independence regarding other nations,
or mere survival, but the greatest possible excellence. Now after he has discussed the
nature of the territory, he turns to what Aristotle did call (in the seventh book of the
Politics) the nature of the citizens, of the populace. But Plato, the Athenian Stranger, does
not speak of the nature of the future citizens. Why? Let us see in 708b, the speech of the
Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] It would not be equally easy for States to conduct settlements in other cases as in
those when, like a swarm of bees, a single clan goes out from a single country and settles,
as a friend coming from friends, being either squeezed out by lack of room or forced by
some other such pressing need. At times, too, the violence of civil strife might compel a
whole section of a State to emigrate; and on one occasion an entire State went into exile,
when it was totally crushed by an overpowering attack. All such cases are in one way
easier to manage, as regards settling and legislation, but in another way harder. In the
case where the race is one, with the same language and laws, this unity makes for
friendliness, since it shares also in sacred rites and all matters of religion; but such a body
does not easily tolerate laws or polities which differ from those of its homeland. Again,
where such a body has seceded owing to civil strife due to the badness of the laws, but
still strives to retain, owing to long habit, the very customs which caused its former ruin,
then, because of this, it proves a difficult and intractable subject for the person who has
control of its settlement and its laws. On the other hand, the clan that is formed by fusion
of various elements would perhaps be more ready to submit to new laws, but to cause it
to share in one spirit and pant (as they say) in unison like a team of horses would be a
lengthy task and most difficult. But in truth legislation and the settlement of States are
tasks that require men perfect above all other men in goodness. (708b-d)
LS: Now we have here an answer to the question why he does not speak of the nature of
the populace: they are already molded by custom. They are not Hobbean or Rousseauan
men in the state of nature, but they are men who have been molded by previous
legislation. And here the problem is this: men cannot live without habits or usages or
customs, and yet these usages or customs or habits are frequently bad. But you never get
men without them. Given the extreme rarity of good habituation—one could even speak
of the essential defect of all habituation—to what is this essential defect due? By the way,
you see that he here raises the question of the melting pot, by implication, as a good
condition for good legislation. It means a weakening of the traditional bonds. Why can
one speak of an essential defect of habituation?
Student: The origins are imperfect.
LS: Yes, habituation depends on legislation, explicitly or implicitly. And on what does
the legislation depend?
Student: The circumstances.

175
LS: Yes, here he uses even a stronger expression. Let us read the beginning of 709, the
first speech of the Athenian there.
Reader:
[Ath.:] I was on the point of saying that no man ever makes laws, but chances and
accidents of all kinds, occurring in all sorts of ways, make all our laws for us. For either it
is a war that violently upsets polities and changes laws, or it is the distress due to
grievous poverty. Diseases, too, often force on revolutions, owing to the inroads of
pestilences and recurring bad seasons prolonged over many years. Foreseeing all this, one
might deem it proper to say—as I said just now—that no mortal man frames any law, but
human affairs are nearly all matters of pure chance. But the fact is that, although one may
appear to be quite right in saying this about sea-faring and the arts of the pilot, the
physician, and general, yet there really is something else that we may say with equal truth
about these same things. (709a-b)
LS: In the first place, I repeat that the reason why all habituation is defective is that all
habituation rests on legislation and, ultimately, on chance. That is an overstatement, but
we must think that through. And chance means that it is simply imposed on man; there is
no reason for that. It is merely that it is so. And now he qualifies that in the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] That God controls all that is, and that Chance and Occasion co-operate with God
in the control of all human affairs. It is, however, less harsh to admit that these two must
be accompanied by a third factor, which is Art. For that the pilots’ art should co-operate
with the Occasion—verily I, for one, should esteem that great advantage. (709b-c)
LS: So in other words, there is a certain mitigation to begin with in saying—and that is
surely Plato’s opinion—that chance is not primary. Not that chance can be reduced to
something else—that is another matter—but there is something more fundamental than
chance, and that is here called god. But even god and chance together leave room for
human art. Human art will find a very limited place in the scheme of politics, and
everything depends on this: on human art, on the political art being able to do something;
otherwise we will never get the right polity. So one thing appears to be clear, whatever
this relation between god and chance happens to be, which is only alluded to here: we
need a piece of good luck if we want to have a good polity. That refers to the territory, it
refers to the character of the future potential citizens, but it refers above all to the
character of the government. These settlers do not come as isolated individuals: there is
some power, some political power there. The character of that power will be decisive for
the quality of the legislation. Now what is that piece of good luck? That is stated in 709b
(end).
Student: May I ask a question before we go on? Is not this whole problem of the origin
of patterns of law dependent on chance and god somehow also found—bound up with his
notion of a dim tradition and of the ancients as the ones who somehow received tradition
intact from a divine source in some way or another?

176
LS: In some way it is necessarily bound up, but in what way? Does the triad—god,
chance, art—depend on tradition?
Student: No, I don’t mean that the triad depends on tradition, but I mean that the
problem of how to answer this idea of the source of law or the fact that somehow all habit
must be imperfect because it is based on legislation—
LS: Yes, but here we are raising this question. The triad is transhistorical. That is always
so that these three elements determine to different degrees what men do. Now here we are
concerned with the question: What is the best possible combination, best possible
constellation, with a view to the best polity? Now it is clear that the complete rule of god
(and here you never know completely whether he means God or a god),2 [complete]
determination whether by god 3 [or] chance, would be fatal to the best order, because art,
human art, must be in it. But what is the most desirable condition regarding the human
art? Let us assume we have a man who possesses the political art to the highest degree.
That does not guarantee, of course, any effectiveness whatever of that art. Is it not clear?
Because, for example, these others might simply tell him to shut up or perhaps make him
shut up. So he must be listened to. And in addition, it depends very much whether those
who listen to him have the power to act on it. And that is the question which he is here
concerned with: the best possible conditions for making human wisdom tell in political or
human matters. That is the question. Now what are these? (page 273, the second long
speech of the Athenian).
Reader:
[Ath.:] This is what he will say—
LS: But let us first take this just a bit before, i.e., the speech of Clinias.
Reader:
[Kl.:] What is the bestiv thing that can rightly be said?
[Ath.:] You mean, do you not, on the side of the lawgiver?
[Clin.:] Yes.
[Ath.:] This is what he will say: “Give me the State under a monarchy—” (709e)
LS: “Tyrant” is the word. He is not so squeamish.
Reader:
[Ath.]: and let the tyrant be young—
LS: Why does he wish to spare our nerves?
Reader:
[Ath.:] and let the tyrantv be young, and possessed by nature of a good memory, quick
intelligence, courage and nobility of manner; and let that quality, which we formerly
iv
v

In the Loeb: “next” instead of “best.”
In the Loeb: “monarch”

177
mentiond as the necessary accompaniment of all the parts of virtue, attend now also on
our monarch’s soul, if the rest of his qualities are to be of any value.”
[Clin.:] Temperance, as I think, Megillus, is what the Stranger indicates as the necessary
accompaniment. Is it not?
[Ath.:] Yes, Clinias; temperance, that is, of the ordinary kind;— (709e-710a)
LS: “Vulgar kind” would be better.
Reader:
[Ath.]: not the kind men mean when they use academic language and identify temperance
with wisdom—
LS: I need not tell you that this usage, i.e., “academic language,” is not Plato[’s]. Plato
founded the Academy. “As some one would say compelling in addition prudence or
wisdom to be moderation.”
Reader:
[Ath.]: but that kind which by natural instinct springs up at birth in children and animals,
so that some are not incontinent, others continent, in respect of pleasures; and of this we
said that, when isolated from the numerous so-called “goods,” it was of no account.
(710a-b)
LS: Do you remember that? That was the key passage in the Third Book. While
moderation, temperance, in the strict sense is indispensable, it is nothing to boast of. It
does not in any way give a title to rule. That was crucial. Now in the first place, we see
that not Plato—of course not—nor the Athenian Stranger, but an absent and nameless
legislator whom he conjures, raises a demand for a tyrant. Because that is really a harsh
word; the translator has no right to sweeten things. He has to say it; otherwise we don’t
understand what Plato means. Now we must come later on to what he means by that.
Now here he refers again to the qualities of the tyrant. Do they ring a bell, these qualities
of the tyrant as mentioned in 709e7 to 8? They have been bodily lifted from somewhere.
Student: Some are human and some are—
LS: No, no. I mean something very external, a mere fact of information.
Student: They are the qualities of the philosopher in the Republic.
LS: Yes, sure. Especially in [Republic] 487a.
Student: The one, young, would not be a quality of the philosopher.
LS: No, that is true, but the others are. But Plato omitted here certain qualifications
which he ascribed to the philosopher. And the first is that he be a lover of truth and
justice. That doesn’t exist here, as you can see. And secondly, the philosopher must have

178
that quality of wittiness or gracefulness, which also is not required of a tyrant, for reasons
which I do not have to labor. But this is a very important question, this reflection about
moderation. This means what Aristotle says in the Ethics, almost: self-control regarding
food and the other bodily pleasures. That is all. Aristotle is a bit more sophisticated, but
that is the content, the subject matter, of moderation according to Aristotle. And why
does Plato inflate moderation by compelling wisdom to be an element of it, and therefore
giving it a status which it does not deserve? That is very strange, that he says 4 [this]. You
know, for example, that you have a good example in the first book. You will remember
that: courage and moderation are perfectly distinguished in ordinary parlance; and that
makes sense, and then the Athenian inflates courage so that it includes not only the
quality of control of fear but also the control of pleasure. And that is going on in all
Platonic dialogues, i.e., this kind of thing regarding the various virtues.
But here let us limit ourselves to the example of moderation. Why could one wish to do
that, to give moderation a much higher status than it deserves temporarily? Well, in the
third book we have seen (or at least in discussing the third book we have seen this) that
moderation is that virtue which is most easily accessible to human beings, males and
females. And courage—in Greek, manliness—by its very name indicates that it is more
likely to be found among males than among females, to say nothing about what the
Republic says about it. But a certain self-control regarding bodily pleasures can be
expected of practically every human being and can be brought about by the proper
habituation, so it is the most common virtue. This of course doesn’t make it unimportant;
it is terribly important, but still low in rank. Now since this virtue can be expected to be
found in every man, it can be said to be characteristic of the demos as demos—and
therefore the whole problem of the contribution of an average virtue, the political
significance of an average virtue. The whole platform of democracy is connected with
that, i.e., with the status of moderation. There are other reasons as well, but I limit myself
for the time being to that.
So we need such a tyrant, who reminds [us] of the Platonic philosopher—but only
reminds of it. One decisive difference: the love of knowledge, of truth, is absent and also
the wittiness is absent. Apparently Socrates thought they were connected with each other.
But one crucial point: this tyrant must be subject to a wise legislator, otherwise the whole
thing will go wrong. The tyrant is only needed because he supplies the power, the
concentrated power needed for establishing a radically different law. Now we have here,
then, this element—you remember the three elements which we wanted: strength,
wisdom, and freedom. The wisdom is supplied by the legislator; the strength is supplied
by the tyrant. What about freedom, which we also need, as we have been told in the third
book? How does it come in? Well, as we will see in 711c, the tyrant must use not only
force but persuasion as well. Men are free politically to the extent to which they are
induced to act properly not by force, but by persuasion. This would be the answer to this
question at this stage. In 710c to d, perhaps we read this speech of the Athenian (page
275).
Reader:
[Ath.:] And also “fortunate”—

179

LS: Namely, the tyrant must be fortunate.
Reader:
not in other respects, but only in this, that in his time there should arise a praiseworthy
lawgiver, and that, by a piece of good fortune, the two of them should meet; for if this
were so, then God would have done nearly everything that he does when he desires that a
State should be eminently prosperous. (710c-d)
LS: I want to show only this. You see, here god and chance have become identified, or,
in other words, the chance is interpreted as the gift of a god. This will come out later on
in a more comprehensive way. The argument proceeds here as follows. The best city
comes5 [most easily] into being through a tyrant because of the consideration of power,
least easily out of an oligarchy. And the Cretan is quite surprised by that. Why is an
oligarchy least able to transform itself into the best polity?
Student: To take what I assume to be a superficial approach: because the power is
distributed among too many people.
LS: Is it superficial?
Student: I say it is, because he says the democracy is better than an oligarchy. It seems to
me that you would have even a wider distribution.
LS: Well, I do not say that Plato is right, but I have heard some talk in up-to-date
political science circles about democratic rule. If you would say to an up-to-date political
scientist, “Democracy is rule of the people,” what would he do?
Student: Laugh at you.
LS: Laugh. And what would he say?
Student: The people can be persuaded.
LS: Yes, but they have a word for that. Who rules?
Student: The elite.
LS: The elite. And what Plato says, in other words, is that in an oligarchy that elite is
more numerous than in a democracy. And he would argue as follows. Look at a
democracy. Who really controls the business? (He thinks of Athenian democracy, of
course.) Well, the demagogue. And there is usually one leader of the people—Cleon and
such kind of men. But in an oligarchy there are fifteen or twenty families, old families;
and, although it is not necessarily true of every generation, this bunch of twenty men,
whoever they may be, have for all practical purposes an equal right in that. That is his
point. Oligarchy is then very bad from the point of view of a revolutionary change, we

180
could say, to use our modern language, which means that oligarchy is unusually stable.
That is the point to be seen here. Unusually stable. And that is also a disadvantage,
because stability, while being a great virtue, is not the only virtue and not even the
highest virtue. Stability in what?
Now let us turn to 712a. Here is a formula at the beginning of 712 which also reminds us
of the Republic, where he speaks of the coincidence of sensibility and moderation with
the greatest power. That is the famous formula of the Republic, with one little change.
What does he say in the Republic? What must coincide? Philosophy. You see, philosophy
doesn’t occur here. Of course it is always there, and the Athenian Stranger, knowing what
philosophy is, can’t help thinking of it. This will become transparent through what he
says, if the reader knows something of philosophy, but not to Clinias and Megillus. We
had one beautiful example, I thought, in the first or second book: the finest song—you
know, [for] which we need somehow to get a really good chorus, and which has then to
be watered down. You remember that old, finest song—and the finest chorus? Good.
Now then we turn to the polity or the regime of the future city. And in this connection the
whole question of the regime is raised, and this is the most detailed discussion of the
subject in Plato’s works. You know these regimes: oligarchies, democracies, kingships,
the whole story. But Megillus is at a loss to say what kind of a regime Sparta has. In one
respect it is a democracy, in another it is an oligarchy. The Athenian says: Well, surely,
you are at a loss, and quite rightly, because you live in a mixed regime. We have seen this
before. Or, as he also puts it—and again this is badly translated—on page 283:vi “For you
do in fact partake in polities” and not “a number of polities.” A “number of” must be
deleted in this sentence. You live in a true polity. The others that are not polities are
confluences of individuals; they are not a true polity. A polity must be mixed. What does
that mean? In all the simple regimes, we could say, a part dominates: the one, the few, the
many. And the rule of a part is nonpolitical; the whole must rule in a way. This is stated
as follows. A true regime is one in which not men rule, but god. That is the first formula,
for example. That makes some sense to us. But you see how different people are and also
at different times, in 713a5, the first speech of Clinias in which he says “Which god?” Is
it Zeus, or who is it? Which god? And therefore the Athenian must take a roundabout
way, because he has to lead up to something else. Clinias doesn’t understand, and
therefore Plato introduces a given god and gives it a proper name. But it is not Zeus but
Cronos. You know, Zeus was the originator of the law of Minos. We can’t use him, so we
take the other, this god who loves men, who is philanthropic (713d6). And in this age of
Cronos demons cared for men and men were perfectly happy. We must look to this rule
of gods or demons as the model for our human polity. And in 713e, can you read that
section of the long speech?
Reader:
[Ath.:] In like manner the God, in his love for humanity, set over us at that time the
nobler race of daemons who, with much comfort to themselves and much to us, took
charge of us and furnished peace and modesty and orderliness and justice without stint,
and thus made the tribes of men free from feud and happy. And even to-day this tale has
vi

Laws 712e.

181
a truth to tell, namely, that wherever a State has a mortal, and no god, for ruler, there the
people have no rest from ills and toils— (713e)
LS: Incidentally, that is also a reminder of the Republic. You remember, in the Republic
he says there will be no cessation of evils for the polity except—what does the Republic
say? He doesn’t say this here, but you will see that it amounts in the end to the same
thing.
Reader:
and it deems that we ought by every means to imitate the life of the age of Cronos, as
tradition paints it, and order both our homes and our States in obedience to the immortal
element within us, giving to reason’s ordering the name of “law.” (713e-714a)
LS: That is all we need. So in other words, the imitation of the age of Cronos, which had
been brought in only by the question of “Which god?” tells us that the divine or the
immortal in man must rule. And that is the mind, nous. What the nous says, dictates: that
is or should be the law. Therefore the rule of god means the rule of law. At this point the
Athenian Stranger must take issue with the alternative view of law, the same view which
is presented in the first book of the Republic by Thrasymachus, and that is from 714b to
the beginning of 715a. And this view is here stated as simply as possible, just as in the
Republic: laws depend on the regime. Democratic laws, progressive income tax, depend
on a democratic electorate. And beyond the regime there is nothing; there is no standard
which enables you to say that regime A is preferable to B. Surely some arbitrary
standards exist: for the common people a democracy is preferable; for a rich man
oligarchy, and so on. Sure, but that is not in the eyes of the independent and earnest
observer. Whatever regime that is established cannot be criticized by any other standards.
All law is merely positive law—and then, of course, since every regime enacts laws with
a view to its own advantage, what is called just is in effect the advantage of the ruling
section, the advantage of the stronger. Against this view the Athenian Stranger asserts the
common good of the whole city as opposed to the good of any segment. The clearest
statement is in 715b2 to 4. If the common good of the whole city is not the end of the
laws, there is no true regime and no correct laws. So if then the law in this sense—vii
—to d7 we find this for the first time, if I am not mistaken. So it is also not impossible
that the sun is meant here.
Reader:
[Ath.:] With him followeth Justice always, as avenger of them that fall short of the divine
law; and she, again, is followed by every man who would fain be happy, cleaving to her
with lowly and orderly behavior— (716a)
LS: Now wait a moment. When he says “lowly,” the Greek term is equivalent to the New
Testament term for humility. I would translate this by “humble” and not by “lowly.” But
let us stop here for a moment. You see, when Aristotle speaks of this, of humility, it is for
him simply a vice. I know very few passages in the classical literature in which humility
is used in a positive sense. There are two passages in the Laws, if I remember well, and
vii

There was a break in the tape at this point.

182
there is a passage in Xenophon’s Constitution of the Spartans. That is also interesting—
the most archaic thing in Greece, Sparta. And when Xenophon describes the Spartans,
their lawabidingness and their obedience to their rulers, he also uses the word “humble.”
The argument here is unusually strongly imbued with religious feelings. This runs
through the whole sequel. Let us see: in 716d1 to 2, here he says the “moderate man.”
There is a certain kinship between moderation as the Greeks understood it and humility.
You can express it in English by inserting a link: modesty. The Greek word which I
translate “in moderation” is especially applied to women. That is the chief virtue of
women according to the Greek view: to be reserved, to be silent, and this kind of thing.
Now we have had humility to moderation, and then later on, in 717a3, he speaks of pious;
and then a little bit later on, of piety.
So we can summarize this part of the argument as follows. The true city is a theocracy:
the rule of god, not the rule of men, and its spirit is that of piety. That is clearly the
suggestion here, and that seems to be the answer to the question of the best regime: the
theocracy. That this is not Plato’s last word on it—you need after all a more technical
answer, i.e., which human beings are to rule—we will see later when he comes to the
human polity proper. But it is by no means irrelevant that this statement is made here. Sir
Ernest Barkerviii has said, not without reason, in his analysis of the Laws, that this is the
beginning of the Middle Ages. There is something to that. It is not sufficient, but it is
true. That is also one of the reasons why quite a few people detest the Laws so much. I
have heard horrible things said, and read them, about the Laws, i.e., that it doesn’t sound
Greek. But it is very Greek nevertheless. But you had a question.
Student: I was just wondering if you could elaborate a bit on the whole relation for Plato,
in the Laws for example, between the law and reason and the constant appeal or linking
up of these things with religion and the gods. I don’t think this is simply a subterfuge to
appease his listeners.
LS: Surely not. I will try to state it as simply as possible: Plato did not believe in Zeus
and Apollo. I am sure of that, although to prove it is not so easy. But I am satisfied that
he did not believe these things at all. But on the other hand, that there must be reason,
rationality, above man, beyond man, that also was Plato’s serious conviction, so that
Plato had to speak of god seriously. But we must again beware identifying the god in
whom Plato believed with the biblical God. That is an entirely different story. In the tenth
book we will find a developed doctrine of particular providence, but to what extent Plato
meant that literally is another question. But that Plato was certain that there is a
fundamental difference between soul and body, and then, even more important, a
difference between mind and soul, and that the whole universe had an intrinsic rationality
which man discovers and does not impose upon it by his scientific method—there is no
doubt about that. The difficulty is this: Plato was sure that the popular beliefs in the gods
were an important social bond. Of course, this fact did not make them true beliefs. And
his whole presentation, I would say, is characterized by the fact that to some extent and in
one sense he surely is a theist, but he is not always a theist in the way in which he
expresses something. I think it would all turn around one simple question: the question of
viii

Sir Ernest Barker (1874-1960), British political scholar and theorist.

183
particular providence. The question of divine reward and punishment turns around
particular providence and not general providence. And that is, I think, the crucial question
regarding Plato’s theology. We will get one important specimen, perhaps the most
important utterance of Plato on the subject, in the theology of the tenth book. We will
discuss that at that time.
Student: But I was also thinking along other lines—that somehow for Plato there is an
essential link, although this would might be too strong, of dependence of philosophy on
theology.
LS: No, that is impossible for Plato.
Student: I know that is so almost by definition, but it seems that in all the key passages,
particularly as regards things political, this reliance is more than just a salutary lie.
LS: No, that would be too simple. While Plato does not believe these myths, they
nevertheless represent something. They are not wholly arbitrary inventions. The
wholeness of the polis, the idea of the common good, is a reflection of the truly natural
wholeness binding together the whole. In this sense that is surely true. Of one thing one
must beware. I know that Wild, in his book on Plato’s theory of culture, ix tried to
understand Plato as a kind of Greek pagan Thomas Aquinas. This is of course impossible.
That Plato defers to a supernatural theology beyond his philosophy is out of the question.
For Plato, all the stories about the gods and everything referring to prayer, ritual, and so
on, would be subordinate to philosophy. There is no question about that. That this
philosophy is in a sense in itself religious he shows by the remark that philosophizing
means to assimilate oneself to god. This is clear. Only the question arises always: What
does Plato mean by a god? Is Plato’s god, to use the famous expression, a personal god?
This is a great question. The highest principle is called, on the one occasion that Plato
uses an expression for it, the idea of the good. Quite a few people say that of course this
is God. But it is not so clear as all that; it would require a very long study of Plato to
decide that. The Laws supply us with some material for studying the question. Whether it
is sufficient for resolving it is another matter.
Now the argument proceeds from here as follows. Now after he has given the answer to
the question of what the best regime is—theocracy—he turns to the question of the
essential laws. The transition is as follows. Not everything which we want regarding
piety, humility and so on can be laid down in the form of law. Laws are not sufficient for
everything; laws must be preceded by preludes. That is the theme of the rest of the fourth
book. And in the light of this discussion, this long speech which we have read here is the
prelude to the whole code. The interlocutors are not aware of it, but in retrospect this
speech becomes the prelude to the whole code. Now let us begin here with 719b9 to 10
(page6 305), which in a way is the beginning of this whole discussion.
Reader:
ix

John Daniel Wild, Plato’s Theory of Man: An Introduction to the Realistic Philosophy of
Culture (1946).

184
[Ath.:] “Now did we not hear you saying a little while ago that the lawgiver should not
permit the poets to compose just as they please? For they would not be likely to know
what saying of theirs might be contrary to the laws and injurious to the State.”
[Clin.:] That is quite true.
[Ath.:] Would our address be reasonable, if we were to address him on behalf of the poets
in these terms? (719b)
LS: What he is doing now is to remind us first of the provisions of the Second Book,
according to which the poets have to be subordinated to the legislator. The poets have to
present that content which the legislator lays down. They have to do it in a form which
they alone can produce and of which they alone can judge properly—the artistic form.
That is their business and there they are free, but the content is laid down by the
legislator. And now at this moment Plato (or the Athenian Stranger) begins to plead to the
legislator on behalf of the poet. What is the meaning of that? Obviously the poet’s status
is to be improved, otherwise we could leave it at the old verdict. Why is it necessary for
political reasons, for the best of the city, to give the poets a different status? Let us read
the next speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “There is, O lawgiver, an ancient saying—constantly repeated by ourselves and
endorsed by everyone else—that whenever a poet is seated on the Muses’ tripod, he is not
in his senses, but resembles a fountain, which gives free course to the upward rush of
water; and, since his art consists in imitation, he is compelled often to contradict himself,
when he creates characters of contradictory moods; and he knows not which of these
contradictory utterances is true. But it is not possible for the lawgiver in his law thus to
compose two statements about a single matter; but he must always publish one single
statement about one matter.” (719c-d)
LS: The legislator must speak clearly and unambiguously. He must not contradict
himself. But the absence of contradiction is not enough; he must also speak
unambiguously. The poets speak ambiguously to the extent that they contradict
themselves. Now, why do they contradict themselves? Two overlapping reasons are
given. The first is that they are divinely inspired: they don’t know what they say, but it
just comes out of them without any reflection on their part. The second point, however, is
that they imitate; and since they imitate different people or the same people in very
different moods, and express this with equal facility, they contradict themselves. That is a
very massive statement, because one could rightly say that when Shakespeare presents
Julius Caesar and Brutus, Shakespeare does not contradict himself if Brutus contradicts
Caesar or vice versa. That is clear. But still, in one part the Athenian Stranger is right.
How do we know what Shakespeare thought about a question where Brutus and Caesar
differ? If you have only the plays of a man, how can you know? That is a real problem.
Now why is this important for legislation? Let us read the sequel.
Reader:

185
[Ath.:] “Take an example from one of your own recent statements. A funeral may be
either excessive or defective or moderate: of these three alternatives you choose one, the
moderate, and this you prescribe, after praising it unconditionally.”
LS: “Simply” would be better. The term “simply” occurs all the time: simply versus
doubly. The legislator must make simple statements. But simple statements are not
enough; we need double statements, and there are two forms of that “doublicity”: the
simple, external doublicity, i.e., the prelude, the rationale of the law. and the law. There
can also be a doublicity within the rationale. That is the difficulty.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “I, on the other hand, if (in my poem) I had a wife of surpassing wealth, and she
were to bid me bury her, would extol the tomb of excessive grandeur; while a poor and
stingy man would praise the defective tomb, and the person of moderate means, if a
moderate man himself, would praise the same one as you. But you should not merely
speak of a thing as ‘moderate’ in the way you have now done, but you should explain
what ‘the moderate’ is, and what is its size; otherwise it is too soon for you to propose
that such a statement should be made law.” (719d-e)
LS: In other words, this very simplicity makes it a bad law. If we say that only moderate
funerals are permitted, then anything is possible. Here we see the poet instructing the
legislator. This is a very simple example. He instructs the legislator. Why can he instruct
the legislator? What enables him to instruct the legislator?
Student: If anyone, he is experienced in such presentations.
LS: But to take it more simply.
Student: Because he has a knowledge of rhetoric and what is involved here is speaking
clearly.
LS: But still more simply.
Student: A knowledge of man.
LS: Yes. He sees this rich woman and that poor, stingy fellow, and the man of moderate
means and moderate habits. He sees them clearly. Every legislator worth his salt would
know this elementary thing. But one must enlarge it to understand it. To be a first-rate
legislator you must know the nature and habits of man. See the end of the first book of
the Laws. But who are the men, if we disregard the philosophers, who are completely out
of place here, who know the varieties of natures and habits? The poets. So from this
moment on the poets will instruct the legislators. The relation is radically inverted.
Student: I notice that here he speaks of the rich woman, whereas in all other cases it has
been the man who possesses the wealth. Is this because the poet cannot be rich?

186
LS: The question which you raise is a necessary one, i.e.: Why is a woman presented as
rich? What would you expect? I believe I can answer this, but I ask the apology of our
ladies; I do not express my opinion but Plato’s. Now when he discusses the decay of the
best regime in the eighth book [of the Republic], who is responsible for the decay on the
side of the individuals? He makes a parallel here: the polis and the individual. Who is
responsible for the decay of the best regime as far as individuals are concerned? The
good man’s wife. Plato was so benighted as to believe that women are more concerned
with externals, with appearance, with glittering things than men, who despise these
things. And thus, while a man would not say that he wanted a fantastic marble
monument, his wife might very well say that she wanted such a thing, and perhaps even
one for her dead husband. Now the central example here is the stingy fellow. That is
rightly in the middle, because which poet would present that case, the stingy fellow
wanting a stingy grave?
Student: The comic poet.
LS: The comic poet, sure, because the first could be done in a beautiful ode, wholly
uncomic; and the last is of course also not comic. So you see Plato does these things all
the time with good reason. And then he forgets for a while about the poets altogether, in a
way, and illustrates the situation by two kinds of physicians: the physicians who learn
their art according to nature, i.e., according to the nature of the art, and those who learn it
empirically, i.e., just looking at the operations, cleaning the test tubes, and other things.
The ones are used for free men and the others are used for slaves, these empirics. Now
how do they treat the patients? The latter, these empirics who treat slaves, simply
command, whereas the true doctors, those who treat free men, have a conversation with
them. They explain to them why they give them aspirin and not Bufferin. And in
addition, as he does not hesitate to emphasize in this passage, they learn from the sick.
They ask the man: Where do you have pains, how long have they lasted, what other
effects have you noticed? I don’t know how things are in the armed forces in this country,
but I was reminded of what I have seen of army physicians in other countries when I
heard of this slave doctor, who surely doesn’t ask fine questions about the source of the
complaint: they just tell the patient. And here the answer given is clear: the twofold
procedure of the sophisticated physician is preferable to that of the empiric, the slave
doctor. Now he illustrates this by the example of the first law to be given. Which are the
first laws to be given? What would you expect?
Student: Marital.
LS: Did you expect that?
Student: Yes, from what went before in the first book.
LS: Very good. That is a good explanation. That gives you a good Platonic authority, but
what about the reasoning?
Student: . . .

187

LS: In other words, he does not begin with the funerals and the other things. He begins
with the marriage. Now let us look at what he does in 721a9 (page 311):
Reader:
[Ath.:] Let us take the law in a simple formx first: how will it run? Probably like this—
LS: He says “perhaps in the following way.” That disposes of a difficulty because the
age, the minimum age of marriage, is given differently later on when he speaks as a
lawgiver. Here he uses it only as an example. This has led people to think that Plato
changes his mind and so on. But he says right at the beginning what he is doing.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “A man shall marry when he is thirty years old and under five and thirty; if he
fails to do so, he shall be punished both by a fine in money and by degradation, the fine
being of such and such an amount, and the degradation of such and such a kind.” (721ab)
LS: What do the lawyers say? Is that not a beautiful blueprint of a law? You just fill it in.
Anyone can frame that law. Now how does he go on?
Reader:
[Ath.:] Such wouldxi be the simple form of marriage law. The double form shall be
this,—“A man shall marry when he is thirty years old and under thirty-five, bearing in
mind that this is the way by which the human race, by nature’s ordinance, shares in
immortality, a thing for which nature has implanted in everyone a keen desire. The desire
to win glory, instead of lying in a nameless grave, aims at a like object.” (721b-c)
LS: What he omits is the word “for.” He says everyone has this natural desire for
immortality or fame. The desire for fame is the desire for immortal fame. Why does he
give this reasoning? Why does he have to prove it—to prove the assertion that everyone
has the desire for immortality? But let us read on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “Thus mankind is by nature coeval with the whole of time, in that it accompanies
it continually both now and in the future; and the means by which it is immortal is this:—
by leaving behind it children’s children and by continuing ever one and the same, it thus
by reproduction share in immortality. That a man should deprive himself thereof
voluntarily is never an act of holiness; and he who denies himself wife and children is
guilty of such intentional deprivation. He who obeys the law may be dismissed without
penalty, but he that disobeys and does not marry when thirty-five years old shall pay a
yearly fine of such and such an amount,—lest he imagine that single life brings him gain
x
xi

In the Loeb: “let us state the law in its simple form.”
In the Loeb: “shall.”

188
and ease,—and he shall have no share in the honours which are paid from time to time by
the younger men in the State to their seniors.” (721c-d)
LS: I think we can leave it at that. That is the double formulation. It is double because it
includes the law proper and in addition the rationale, the reason, of the law.
Student: Is the law itself simply “You shall marry between thirty and thirty-five” or is it
also to include “or else you will be fined”?
LS: Both.
Student: The threat is part of the law?
LS: Oh sure. The threat is the harbinger of the compulsion. You could even say [that]
whoever is not married at thirty-five years of age and does not supply a physician’s
certificate testifying to his inability to consummate the marriage, or something of the sort,
will be fined with, say, a twenty percent tax.
Student: I thought this might be considered enforcement merely and not law as such.
LS: No, the threat is essential to it. But did you notice something? One duality is very
clear: rationale and threat. But is there not another difficulty here, indicated by this
strange “for” to which I drew your attention in 721c1? Everyone has by nature the desire
for immortality, and men cannot be immortal as individuals but only as members of the
immortal human race. Man is coeval with time. You remember the beginning of the third
book? There were always men as long as there was time, and there will always be men as
long as there is time. No evolution. What is the difficulty here? Well, if we would stoop
to such low things as psychology one could say: What about Plato? Was he married when
he was thirty-five? He wasn’t married at all. One can say: Well, all right, a man can be a
bad fellow and yet can be an excellent teacher of virtue. That is possible to some extent.
Really. You can preach the virtue of honesty, for example, and embezzle money. There
have been such people. Therefore, why not regarding this? But it is a serious question
apart form Plato’s private life. What is the difficulty here? Why does he prove the fact
that everyone has this desire for immortality? Why does he prove that?
Student: Well, I would suggest that is [how] one aims at immortality, leaving children
behind is only one way.
LS: Yes. There is plenty of evidence: I refer you only to Banquet 208b, among other
references where this is developed. There are three forms which that can take. There is
the desire for immortality. First there is procreation: physical immortality, the genes, and
so on. The second is the immortality of fame, where the individual survives as individual,
e.g., the name of your ancestor two hundred generations ago you probably don’t know,
probably no one knows. Even in the very old nobility the question arises whether the
same noble family is the same noble family. I had a French student whose name occurs in
the records of the fifth and sixth centuries, but the trouble is that it is only the name, and

189
he doesn’t know whether it is really the blood. But Homer, on the other hand, survives up
to the present day as an individual. And then there is a still higher one according to Plato:
knowledge. To understand the eternal is in a way a union with the eternal.
The rationale, we can say, has a certain depth in itself, because the desire for immortality
is the desire for procreation on the one hand and for glory on the other. The third is here
not mentioned at all. We can state it as follows. Precisely because not all men desire
procreation by nature, the law is needed. Why would this have to be a law if this were the
natural desire? So there is a certain hidden factor in the reasoning. The general reason
given does not justify simply the law in favor of procreation. It justifies also a life
devoted to the quest for immortal fame, and that is nothing which is of any concern to the
lawgiver. But we must raise another question here: What has all this to do with the fact
that we are still in the context of a statement on behalf of the poets?
Student: This is a poetic truth rather than a real truth that he is using to persuade them
with.
LS: Yes, that is true. But perhaps one could state it as follows: that the poet as poet, on
the highest level, addresses by one speech different audiences. And by different is meant
at least two. This prelude, as Plato understands it, could only be written by a poet. This
doesn’t mean that it has to be written in meter; that is the least interesting thing. But let us
look at a few more passages. In 724 (beginning), let us read this speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So then the prelude we previously composed concerning the gods and those next
to the gods, and concerning parents, living and dead, was, as we now declare, sufficient;
and you are now bidding me, I understand, to bring up, as it were, to the light of day the
residue of the same subject. (724a)
LS: “As we say now.” In other words, at that time it was not clear, or certainly not clear
to Clinias and Megillus although it was clear to the Athenian, that this long speech about
the gods was the prelude to the whole code. Now what will they do next? But this prelude
is not followed by the laws regarding gods and parents. We have been told that the first
law is that regarding marriage. Whether that holds true or not we must see. But let us see
what he promises now.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, surely, it is both fitting and of the greatest mutual advantage that, next to the
matters mentioned, the speaker and his hearers should deal with the question of the
degree of zeal or slackness which men ought to use in respect of their souls, their bodies,
and their goods, and should ponder thereon, and thus get a grasp of education as far as
possible. Precisely this, then, is the statement which we must actually make and listen to
next. (724a-b)
LS: That is said to be the next theme; we must see whether the promise is kept and to
what extent it is kept. I have finished with my notes on this book, but there may be quite

190
a few points which you would like to raise. Is there a particularly difficult or strange
passage which we did not discuss?
Student: Yes, he says the prelude must be a third requisite of law. But he in a sense
identifies persuasion with prelude. And persuasion was also a requisite of law. In what
sense, then, is the prelude different from persuasion, it is a separate requisite?
LS: And what would be the two others? What would be the other requisites of law?
Student: The threat, I suppose.
LS: Do you know the passage?
Student: Yes, although he doesn’t tell us what the three are.
LS: Would you read it? Perhaps I overlooked it. Page 315, 722c.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And I, my dear sirs, perceive still a third requisite which ought to be found in
laws, but which is nowhere to be found at present.
[Clin.:] What is it you allude to?
[Ath.:] A matter which, by a kind of divine direction, has sprung out of the subjects we
have now been discussing. It was little more than dawn when we began talking about
laws, and now it is high noon, and here we are in this entrancing resting-place; all the
time we have been talking of nothing but laws, yet it is only recently that we have begun,
as it seems, to utter laws, and what went before was all simply preludes to laws. What is
my object in saying this? It is to explain that all utterances and vocal expressions have
preludes and turnings-up (as one might call them), which provide a kind of artistic
preparation which assists towards the further development out of the subjects. (722c-d)
Student: And then he begins talking about the prelude in the next long speech.
LS: Yes. I cannot answer this question on the basis of the context because it would take
too long to read that, but I have a suggestion, or a researchable hypothesis, as they say,
namely, that the persuasion in the prelude is twofold. We have read the specimen of the
prelude, and this specimen has a twofold meaning. The first meaning is the apparent
meaning: the only way in which an individual can partake of immortality is through the
human race by procreation. And an alternative was alluded to, but in no way developed
because it was irrelevant for the law proper, and that was immortal fame. Now this is an
inner duplicity. Now if we take this inner twofoldness of the prescription and add the
threat, then we have three. There may be some difficulty based on the context, but I do
not remember any at the moment. I had overlooked that.
But I think that from a broader point of view, disregarding the special status of the Laws
and thinking of Plato’s thought as a whole, I believe that there is one thing of particular
importance in the fourth book, and that is the rehabilitation of poetry, as one could call it:

191
that the poets are autonomous not only regarding the form—that was already stated
clearly in the second book—but also that the poets are not simply subject to the legislator,
because they themselves instruct or may instruct the legislator. And then this leads up to a
much broader question: What then is the difference between the poets and the
philosophers? That this rehabilitation of the poets is made in the Laws—in which the
other people present have never heard of philosophy, and that means practically every
reader of Platonic dialogues—the question arises as to what is the relation between
philosophy and poetry. Does not poetry fulfill the function of philosophy? Can it not
fulfill it, and perhaps even fulfill it better? Today, as you know, among the people who
are concerned with this sort of question this is a very serious question, and I believe that
many sophisticated contemporaries of ours would give the edge to the poets. Especially is
this so if you think of philosophy as logical positivism; then I think the poets win hands
down. But in the case of Plato, it is a bit different. Plato decided, and to that extent the
external is true, that philosophy is superior to poetry; for example, the famous thesis of
the Republic, also confirmed by many other things. But in what does the superiority
consist? And what is it that poetry cannot do and philosophy alone can do, and why is
this the highest? This is not so easy to answer, because the answer given in the tenth book
of the Republic—which is the clearest statement in the Republic—is, if taken literally,
absurd. The poets are imitators of imitators. They are inferior in wisdom to the
carpenters, shoemakers, and whoever else there may be. That is the official answer, and it
is an absurd answer. It can only be taken as an indication of the difficulty. One must first
interpret that. Which imitators do the poets imitate? Obviously not cobblers, carpenters,
and so on.
And I think the only answer which one could give which would be worthy of the theme
and in agreement with what Plato indicates elsewhere is what Nietzsche says. What
Nietzsche says explicitly about Plato is frequently very impossible, but he has been
deeply influenced by Plato nevertheless, and many things which he says in his own name,
believing them to be his discovery, are due, I believe, to the not-quite-conscious influence
of Plato. Now Nietzsche said the poets are artists, have always been valets of a morality,
of an established morality. That is what Plato means: the poets imitate that “truth,” those
opinions which the legislator authoritatively has laid down. 7[The poet] glorifies the
ideals of a society merely because they are the ideals of a society. The medieval minstrel
takes the chivalrous notion of love and glorifies it, he does not question it; and there are
many other examples. Shakespeare takes the British monarchy at its best, accepts it, and
glorifies it in his histories. This kind of thing. That is to some extent true, but only to
some extent. I do not believe that this can be applied to the poetry on the highest level,
and I think Plato knew that. Herodotus had said before Plato that Homer and Hesiod, so
far from imitating ancient legislators regarding the gods, created the Greek theology. So
the poets are not imitators of imitators but rather originators of such things, at least on the
highest level. Now what then 8 the difference [is] between philosophers and poets
becomes a very difficult question, especially if one considers the fact that for Plato the
theme of philosophy can be said to be the soul. And what are the poets concerned with? I
am not speaking now of these people in California; I mean real poets. What is it except
the soul? What is the difference? It is really difficult to say. And this is only an occasion,
the fourth book of the Laws, to raise this question because here, as I say, a reversal of the

192
judgment of poetry as it was made in the second book has taken place. His examples here
are very simple, so that one can easily smile about them—e.g., this rich woman, the
stingy fellow, the tombs—and yet if one reads these with some thinking, one sees what is
going on here: the poet instructs the legislator. That is crucial. The humblest example is
as sufficient for making that point as the most impressive examples.

1

Deleted “and.”
Deleted “completely.”
3
Deleted “and.”
4
Deleted “so”
5
Deleted “easiest.”
6
Deleted “205.”
7
Deleted “he”
8
Moved “is.”
2

193
Session 8: February 10, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —statement of the subject matter of book 5. You also alluded
to or indicated certain difficulties in the presentation. i Now you noted that he does not
go over immediately to the regime but discusses these conditions, the citizen body and so
on. But he had already done so in the fourth book. Remember? I mean, I—
Student: Well, he assumed the citizen body was present.
LS: Let me first say . . . It is one of the deepestii fictions of which men make use, because
otherwise life would not be bearable, that everyone reads the assignment for each time, so
I do not want to—you did?
Student: Yes . . .
LS: I did not ask you, because I dislike spies. [Laughter] But still, if you did read book 4,
as you spontaneously said, then you must have become particularly aware of the fact that
here something is repeated. And there never exists an identical repetition; there is always
a change. Now what is the change here? On what is the emphasis in our book when he
speaks of the composition of the citizen body?
Student: Well, he emphasizes the matter of choice, and here we have—
LS: But of a certain choice he also spoke there. It is true; that is not wrong, what you say,
because there Clinias simply informs him about that. But still, the Athenian uses that
opportunity for discussing alternatives; and therefore, while practically there is no choice
in the situation, the theoretical possibilities of choice are also developed there. But what
is the difference? I mean, something very massive, something with which he is chiefly
concerned in book 5 and which is, to say the least, not chiefly concerned in book 4.
Student: Let me guess again—choosing virtuous citizens. But—
LS: That is a formula which is very important, but which is also elusive. But what he is
putting his finger on in book 5 is the question of the rich and the poor. That played no
role in book 4. Now, and when you look later, when he discusses—in the further
discussions of the book there is also a very great emphasis on the problem of property. I
think this problem was of course noticeable also on earlier occasions, but it comes now to
the fore. And if you say the first laws should be those of procreation, as Plato says at least
twice, that is perfectly true, but politically speaking—meaning, the crude political way—
the question of the rich and the poor is more pressing. You know? It is no accident, I
i

Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded. The transcript of this session is based upon the remastered audiofile. It is the only
recorded session of the course that has survived. Ellipses in this session indicate an inaudible
word or words.
ii
We are not certain that this is the word Strauss used.

194
think, that in the Republic, where he arranges in the eighth book the various regimes used
there (there are only five there), oligarchy is in the center: the rule of the rich. And we
have heard something about the rule of the rich in book 4. Or was it—ya, I think it was in
book 4, or maybe book 3. Oligarchy is the most stable regime. The transition to a good
regime is more feasible from any other regime than from oligarchy, which is the great
defect of oligarchy, but on the other hand it implies also that it is unusually stable. He
says there is a large number of powerholders in an oligarchy as compared with
democracy on the one hand, and any monarchical rule on the other. Oligarchy is the rule
of a few, as literally translated, but as Aristotle in his wisdom put it: It so happens that
everywhere the rich are few and the poor are many, and therefore the rule of the few is in
fact the rule of the rich. And that means that Plato is fully aware of this strange situation,
that a society dedicated to virtue must give an unusual power to people distinguished not
by virtue but by wealth—which is morally very indifferent, you know, there are good
virtuous and vicious rich. But this hard and massive fact of wealth comes in as a
deflecting and diluting factor necessarily, in Plato’s opinion. Ya?
Student: Why is it that Aristotle says it is not oligarchy but democracy which is the most
stable regime in the Politics? I mean, does that . . . he said that oligarchy is in danger both
from the democrats and from within itself, whereas democracy is not.
LS: Ya. I do not know. Perhaps he means—that is by no means impossible in Aristotle,
that he abstracts from other considerations and says, looking at this particular
phenomenon, that in oligarchy you have both a division within the ruling class and the
opposition of the demos, from this point of view democracy is more stable—because you
cannot have overlooked the fact of Spartan stability compared with the much lesser
stability of the democratic city, Athens.
Student: . . . the oligarchy in Athens had for a hundred years, had a democracy except
for one little break . . . oligarchy and many, many—
LS: Yes, but not in Sparta. That is a very legitimate question, but—
Student: Was Sparta really an oligarchy, I think that’s the—
LS: Ya, perhaps he would say Sparta is not really an oligarchy: Sparta was a mixture of
oligarchy and democracy and therefore for this reason more stable than democracy. But
the democracy would be the most stable of the simple regimes. He could have meant that.
Student: But I still don’t see the—
LS: Yes, but then the question is this. If you are right, and you may be right, and then the
question—there is a clear-cut issue between Plato and Aristotle. Ya? One would have to
do justice to these two men, assuming that neither one says nonsense, of course. This
issue comes in, on which Plato insists: the fact that in a democracy there are fewer rulers
than in an oligarchy, as Plato contends. I mean, the demagogues are always very few.

195
How far this—I don’t really know. I can’t say; I am wholly unprepared for that
discussion. But it is a serious problem.
The other point I would like to mention [about] what would have been possible to discuss
in your paper is this. You did not stress strongly enough the fact that in our book we find
the only reference approaching explicitness, not explicit but approaching explicitness, to
the Republic. So that the clear deviation is made at a certain point, and it is clear from the
context that it is a deviation from the scheme of the Republic; and then therefore to bring
up on this occasion the whole question of the relation of the Republic and Laws—that
might have been possible, but we can do that later.
Now let us then turn to a coherent discussion and first say a few words about the plan.
Now you remember that we are now in the constructive part of the Laws. Books 1 to 3
were the critical part; books 4 to 12 are the constructive part: nine books. It is a strange
fact, to which you do not have to pay any serious attention, that in the Republic we have a
similar distribution. We have one destructive part, book 1, refutation of false opinions;
and the constructive part consists of nine books. Classical scholars will immediately say
that this is nonsensical remark, because the distribution into books is post-Platonic. That
may be, but we don’t know. And in addition, we do not know whether, even if the formal
distribution into books is post-Platonic, the questions would still arise, whether the
distributors did not follow certain indications which are implied in the book itself, and
whether they followed a merely mechanical principle: such and such a number of 1scrolls
is one book, and more than that is—and so on. But at any rate, we are now in the
constructive part of the Laws and we still are dealing, in about half of this book, with the
proemium, the prelude to the whole code. That goes up to 734e, and thereafter he begins
with what he calls the laws of the regime, and that goes up to the sixth book and perhaps
even beyond. Now this prelude part, the prelude to the whole code, began in the fourth
book, and there he dealt with the gods and the ancestors. And in the fifth book he turns to
the soul, to the body, and the possessions. And then he turns to the qualities of the
individual. The distinction is not very clear; perhaps we can clarify that when we come to
that. And these two subjects are taken together under the heading the divine things, as
such distinguished from the human things, the human things being pleasure and pain.
This is the division of the section on the prelude to the laws. It is very mysterious; some
of the things may become clear when we turn to the text.
Now at the beginning, where he indicates the subject matter, at the beginning of the fifth
book, which follows immediately of course on the end of the fourth book, where you also
find an indication of the subject matter. There is this order of subjects: the gods, the
ancestors, the souls, the bodies, and property. And this is an order of descent, of course,
and an order with a view to honoring: what has to be honored most comes first, and what
has to be honored least, property, comes last. He distinguishes the right kind of honoring
from the erroneous form of honoring, and especially regarding the soul, of which he
speaks first. Now what is the erroneous kind of honoring the soul? That is not difficult to
understand: to honor one’s soul by hook and by crook, meaning whether it deserves this
or not. Erroneous honoring of the soul is conceit. He enumerates altogether seven errors
regarding honoring the soul (in 727 to the beginning of 728), and he concludes this

196
discussion with: true honoring of the soul of course means to honor the soul according to
its desert and not by hook or by crook. And that is reduced to lawabidingness.
Lawabidingness, that is, you honor your soul truly by obeying the law. What is the link? I
mean, this is of course a very crude and sweeping statement, but what is the justification
of this statement, the rhetorical justification—we cannot expect more—what is that? Why
do you honor your soul truly by obeying the law, period? What is a more sensible
statement regarding honoring the soul? Yes?
Student: I was going to suggest in answer that for all intents and purposes law is what
declares what is right and wrong, a standard of desert.
LS: True honoring of the soul means making the soul virtuous. But if, and this is a big if,
the rules which we have to obey in order to become virtuous are laid down by the law,
then clearly honoring the soul consists in lawabidingness and nothing else. Good. Now in
this connection there is a remarkable passage which we should consider (728a to d, page
327). Let us begin with the second line on page 327.
Reader:
[Ath.:] To speak shortly:— in respect of the things which the lawgiver enumerates and
describes as either, on the one hand, base and evil, or, on the other hand, noble and good,
if any man refuses to avoid by every means the one kind, and with all his power to
practice the other kind,—such a man knows not that everyone who acts thus is treating
most dishonorably and most disgracefully that most divine of things, his soul. Hardly
anyone takes account of the greatest “judgment” (as men call it) upon evil-doing; that
greatest judgment is this,—to grow like unto men that are wicked, and, in so growing, to
shun good men and good counsels and cut oneself off from them, but to cleave to the
company of the wicked and follow after them; and he that is joined to such men
inevitably acts and is acted upon in the way that such men bid one another to act. Now
such a resultant condition is not a “judgment” (for justice and judgment are things
honourable), but a punishment, an infliction that follows on injustice; both he that
undergoes this and he that undergoes it not are alike wretched,—the one in that he
remains uncured, the other in that he is destroyed in order to secure the salvation of many
others. (728a-c)
LS: We may leave it at that. Now this is a very remarkable statement. The translation is
here a problem, but first of all the starting point is this (it is here not developed but is
found in other Platonic passages): the distinction between the noble and the just. The
necessity of the distinction appears from the fact of punishment most clearly: to undergo
punishment is just, that is for certain, but it is not noble. It is never noble. So there are
things which are just without being noble. That is here implied. But here the whole
position is somewhat changed by the premise (where is that?) that in c2 to 3 the noble
and the just are identical. Now if, as he puts it, the just is noble, meaning if everything
just is noble, then of course punishment too is noble. If this is unqualifiedly true, it would
also be a noble action on the part of him who undergoes punishment. But let us see what
he says here more precisely. The word which he translated by “judgment” is in the text
the Greek word dikē. [LS writes on the blackboard] . . . The Greek word “justice” or

197
“just” is derivative from that. Dikaios means just and dikē means justice. So justice has
very much to do with punishment, so that Plato can occasionally, as in the Gorgias, use
dikaiosune, justice, the word for justice, as an equivalent of vindictive justice, of punitive
justice. Now what does he say here? True dikē regarding an evil-doing consists in the
man’s becoming similar to the wicked and in being cut off from the good. Now in
becoming similar to the wicked he will do and suffer what the wicked by nature do to one
another, both in deed and in speech. That is in b7 to c2. What the wicked suffer at the
hands of the other wicked is punishment as distinguished from judgment, if I stick to that
translation. Punishment does not do any good to any man. It doesn’t cure, or else it
merely destroys. Punishment is not a cure for evil. That deviates from many Platonic
statements more favorable to punishment, but this passage is all the more remarkable
because of the other position, because when one looks at the other passages more
carefully, one sees that there is a problem there too. Now what is the problem? Do men
become good by punishment as punishment? That is the great question. In the Platonic
perspective, let us take a man who habitually steals, for example. And then there is
punishment, jail or whatever it may be. He is punished or he sees others punished. What
happens? What is the effect of the punishment in the case in which it does have an effect?
Student: The one who observes may become more careful.
LS: So that would be no conversion whatever, it would merely be an external adaptation
to the punishment. He would not become a good man. But he who would become a good
man, how would he become good after having been bad?
Student: Well, presumably by developing the opposite virtues.
LS: But more precisely. In the famous statements of Plato as to virtue, which are written
large everywhere, virtue is knowledge. How would he become good? By realizing the
badness of the action. This insight is a cure, but there is no essential relation whatever
between this insight and punishment. That punishment has great practical advantages we
all know, and I think we accept it without any squeamishness. But the question is whether
a certain expectation from punishment, that punishment as such is the educative thing, is
in itself not reasonable. This is a remarkable passage here. I don’t believe it has an equal
in Plato’s writings in explicitness, and especially this remark that punishment is
something which the wicked inflict on the wicked. That must of course be properly
interpreted; as such it is a gross overstatement. What he means is this, that those who are
not guided by insight, i.e., the wicked, react in a certain manner to the actions of others
not guided by insight: Just hit back. That’s punishment. Plato doesn’t say that should not
be done, but he only says you can’t expect much from that. That is one of these hard
rocks on which the ship of state necessarily sits, in spite of all its motions, just as
property is another example—a certain irrationality which, however, is deeply found in
the nature of man. Mr. Benjamin?
Student: The impact of this book in particular of the Laws is that goodness is determined
by, and bestness is determined by obedience to law, not by education.

198
LS: It is the same. You see, that is from Plato’s point of view the same, because in the
first place, Plato knows very well—these trivial things did not need the genius of
Aristotle to be discovered—that habituation is very important. And his simple formula
“virtue is knowledge” is not a solution to a problem but a formulation of a problem. We
have seen and we find today other reference to the importance of habituation. There is no
question. So in the first place, by obeying the law you acquire certain habits of acting: not
stealing, for example. In addition—that you acquire through law. Of course, if the law is
foolish and bad, you will be habituated in badness, that is true. But let us assume that we
have a tolerably decent law. You get only habituation this way, that is perfectly true. But
how does the educative influence of law on the level of insight come in? And how did
Plato provide for it in the Laws?
Student: Education from birth.
LS: That is too general.
Different student: I was going to say, is it not a persuasion?
LS: The preludes. That is the reason why he is so insistent on the preludes, the proemium
or preamble to the laws. So you have not only the mere command—he who steals a sheep
must stay in jail for such and such a time and give a restitution of so and so much—but in
addition there is an argument which shows to everyone how destructive of everything a
sensible man cherishes theft is. I don’t believe a very sophisticated argument is needed to
show that theft is really destructive of a society. It requires only the simple reflection that
if everyone would steal, who would work?
Student: The problem I was raising earlier was this. You suggested that the passage says
that punishment cannot make a man good, that punishment can do only evil. But if you
punish a man he becomes obedient to the law; whether or not I do it for a good reason,
the only test for me will be the obedience to the law.
LS: That is not enough. The point is this: then you can still wish to steal and only say it is
too hazardous. The conversion would only come from the insight, and this insight is
brought about through our law here by its preludes, by the statement of the reasons why
theft is to be punished.
Student: I understand this, but the problem is that a man could then appear to be a good
citizen while actually being a bad man.
LS: Ya. That is unfortunately so, and Plato—did you ever read the second book of the
Republic, where Glaucon describes this with great vigor? The most completely criminal
man is admired as justice incarnate because he is such a first-rate hypocrite. Sure, that is a
problem. And from here you understand immediately the importance of property. We
want a city in which the virtuous men predominate, that is the decisive thing. Then
certain purely technical considerations [enter]. Needless to say, without some equipment,
as Aristotle calls it, which means without some property, virtue in the full sense cannot

199
be had. We don’t see this so well today because we have so many foundations and so,
and it is part of the full citizen’s virtue to have some information about other countries.
And that means traveling, and that means money. Now today the foundations are there,
and therefore the problem no longer exists, but let us go back into that antediluvian age
when there were no foundations, and then people had to have money themselves. So
virtue in the fullest sense required property. Good. So our law that the virtuous should
predominate means now in fact of course people of property. This property can be
specified by law: say it must be landed property, or it must have been so long in the
family, and all this kind of thing. But still, property is something different from2 virtue.
Now if you look at these two criteria, virtue and property, you make immediately one
observation: that regarding virtue, it is very hard to judge, because you can’t look to the
heart. It is perhaps not so impossible as Glaucon presented it—he was a very young
man—but still, it is difficult, and especially for officials it is very difficult to do that. So
what do you do? You cannot easily recognize the virtuous. For example, if you would say
that the virtuous are to step forth from a file of men—well, it is hard to check. But if you
say those who possess, say, one hundred thousand dollars or more, that is much more
easily recognizable. Therefore in practice, aristocracy has a tendency to be an oligarchy
of some sort. Ya? That was in a way the burden of the modern criticism of the
Aristotelian–Platonic scheme, for example, in Machiavelli. And then of course the
question arises, of course wealth does not have the respectability which virtue has,
whatever our relativistic friends may say, because we know that in our everyday life we
always act on the principle that virtue, or whatever the fashionable term for it today may
be, is more important than wealth. But the point which I stress here is only this: that
certainly Plato, but also Aristotle were aware of this difficulty that there is an almost
inevitable bias of the rule of the virtuous, of aristocracy, toward the rule of men of a
certain kind of wealth, not necessarily of any wealth . . . To see who owns a landed estate
of a certain size and who has owned it for such a length of time, that’s easy: every little
official can do that by looking up the records of purchases and sales. But virtue is elusive,
and in political matters that is a difficulty, that we need crude rules and we deal with an
extremely elusive subject. And if I am not mistaken, that is the root of the troubles in
which our positivistic friends are bogged. They try to get rid of the elusiveness by an
altogether perfectly exact science, but by this very fact they take the life out of it. That
needs a very long argument, but I would like only to mention it as an answer to this
question for the time being.
I note now that in 728e5 there is a reference to humility again. I mentioned this before,
but now it is in a negative sense. Then he goes on to speak of the mean, the mean
regarding the soul, but also regarding the body and regarding property. That is the great
theme here. There is in 729b to c a statement about education to which Mr. . . . referred
in his paper which is perhaps worth reading.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And let no man love riches for the sake of his children, in order that he may leave
them as wealthy as possible; for that is good neither for them nor for the State. For the
young the means that attracts no flatterers, yet is not lacking in things necessary, is the

200
most harmonious of all and the best; for it is in tune with us and in accord, and thus it
renders our life in all respects painless. To his children it behooves a man to bequeath
modesty—
LS: Or a sense of shame.
Reader:
not money oriii abundance. (729a-b)
LS: Not gold. It is much more succinct in the Greek. Not sense of shame, not gold.
Reader:
We imagine that chiding the young for their irreverence is the way to bequeath this; but
no such result follows from the admonition commonly given nowadays to the young,
when people tell them that “youth must reverence everyone.” Rather will the prudent
lawgiver admonish the older folk to reverence the young, and above all to beware lest any
of them be ever seen or heard by any of the young either doing or saying anything
shameful; for where the old are shameless, there inevitably will also the young be very
impudent. The most effective way of training the young—as well as the older people
themselves—is not by admonition, but by plainly practicing throughout one’s own life
the admonitions which one gives to others. (729b-c)
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. I think Plato hits the issue between progressive
education and authoritarian education exactly between—what was the phrase,
between . . . —he hits it on the nail.iv You see how little he was an authoritarian in the
vulgar sense of the term, and on the other hand, one couldn’t express this more strongly
than he does when he says the old must have reverence for the young, which seems to be
the opposite of all old-fashioned authoritarianism, but he doesn’t draw the conclusions
which progressivist education . . . Now this remark was made in the context of the subject
[of] possessions. That is quite interesting. What does this mean here? What are the
possessions of which he speaks? He spoke here of children, and then he speaks of
relatives, thereafter of friends, then of fellow citizens, and finally of strangers, and then of
suppliants. In a way, these too are3 men’s possessions. You know: My child, my friend,
belongs to me—and then my fellow citizen; and then, by plausible enlargement, then also
the opposite of the fellow citizen, the stranger. And he goes on to the suppliant. He does
not speak here of the individual yet. We shall see this later. He still speaks of the man and
his possessions. You see that he refers to gods in the case of blood relations other than
children, as well as speaking of strangers and suppliants. In other words, in all these cases
in which the natural affection cannot be sufficiently trusted—in the case of the children,
generally speaking, the natural affection is enough, but not in the case of other blood
relations. Think of divisions of property among brothers and all this kind of thing, to say
nothing of cousins, and so on. He refers to Zeus only in the case of strangers, where there
is [the] least natural love, because here is a certain community among fellow citizens, a
community of interest. Where there is the least natural love is where there is the greatest
iii
iv

In the Loeb: “not money, in abundance.”
“Hits the nail on the head” is the common phrase in English.

201
need for divine sanctions. This whole passage is a remarkable specimen, I think, of
Plato’s admonitions or exhortatory speeches altogether.
In 730b we find a transition to a new subject. Let us read the beginning.
Reader:
[Ath.:] As concerns a man’s social relations—
LS: “Social relations” is of course not there, but all right.
Reader:
towards his parents, himself and his own belongings, towards the State also and friends
and kindred,—whether foreign relations or domestic,—our exposition is now fairly
complete. It remains to expound next the character which is most conducive to nobility of
life— (730b)
LS: Let us see this. The following subject is as a man of what character, of what quality,
he himself would spend his life in the most noble manner. This “he himself” is, I think,
the crucial point, and he is now more concerned with the character of the individual in
himself. He makes clear in the immediate sequel that this will deal with the subject which
is translegal, which cannot be provided for by law but rather by praise and blame. So one
can say that is more moral than legal. And he gives here another order[ing] of the good
things: first, truth; second, justice; and third, taken together, moderation and practical
wisdom. Of special importance to us is the section on justice, this is in 730d2 to 7.
Reader:
[Ath.:] He that does no wrong is indeed a man worthy of honour; but worthy of twice as
much honour as he, and more, is the man who, in addition, consents not to wrong-doers
when they do wrong; for while the former counts as one man, the latter counts as many,
in that he informs the magisrates of the wrongdoing of the rest. And he that assists the
magistrates in punishing, to the best of his power,—let him be publicly proclaimed to be
the Great Man of the State and perfect— (730d)
LS: So in other words, here we have an entirely different view of punishment. The man
who punishes in a large scale and as a private citizen, is available for the law
enforcement, for performing also regarding criminals, is the great and perfect man in the
city. That is the other aspect of the problem of punishment. You see here he mentions
truth, justice, and third, moderation and practical wisdom. He omits one of the cardinal
virtues: courage, manliness; and we see immediately why. Or must we spell that out to be
sure whether we see right away?
Student: . . .
LS: But why does he take it out?
Student: Probably because he doesn’t want the censors quarreling with the lawgiver.

202

LS: Well, the defects of courage have been pointed out so much 4that every gangster
possesses courage in the vulgar sense of the word that we don’t need this sort of
information anymore. But it has here a clear meaning in the context. If the perfect man as
described here is a large-scale punisher. You could know this from any TV show dealing
with the subject. This requires a lot of courage. You know? Think of the fellow coming
out of jail and now bent on revenge and the people who are afraid of him. But here and
there someone faces that ex-convict. I give you only one of the many experiences I have
had through this medium. So courage is—what he implies here is this. The most noble
use of courage is this one: to stand up for the enforcement of justice within one’s
community.
Student: You arrive at this on the basis of the fact that he left it [courage] out.
LS: There must be a reason why he left it out, if he has all the other cardinal virtues here.
He has truth here, that is right. But still I would say it is more natural to say that courage
is implied in justice than to say that truth is the substitute for courage. You remember that
in one earlier statement of justice, it was said that these and these virtues come together
that constitute justice, and courage was one of these. That is part of a justification. There
are other remarks on this subject here in 731b to c. Every man must be spirited. Can you
read that?
Reader:
[Ath.:] Every man ought to be at once spiritedv and gentle in the highest degree. For, on
the one hand, it is impossible to escape from other men’s wrongdoings, when they are
cruel and hard to remedy, or even wholly irremediable, otherwise than by victorious
fighting and self-defence, and by punishing most rigorously; and this—
LS: May I only say one thing. You see here there is a connection in Plato, here and in the
Republic, between courage and spiritedness, courage being the virtue of the spirited part
of the soul. Good. Continue.
Reader:
and this no soul can achieve without noble passion or spiritedness. (731b)vi
LS: Spiritedness, ya. Incidentally, it is important to see that he speaks here of noble
spiritedness. This disposes of the great difficulty we have in the Republic, where
spiritedness as such is praised all the time and this simply does not make sense. The
praise can be awarded only to a noble spiritedness and not to spiritedness as such. To take
a very simple example, if I desire, say, my neighbor’s donkey, and I don’t get it and I get
angry about it, this anger is not a bit more noble than my original desire.

v
vi

In the Loeb: “passionate”
In the Loeb: “noble passion.”

203
Student: Could the introduction of truth as one of the primary virtues of the citizen be
due to the fact that he is directing this to the citizen and not to the lawgiver? In other
words, the lawgivers, this may not be so high for the lawgiver as for the citizen.
LS: You are referring to the problem that courage is absent and truth is present in that list
of virtues?
Student: Yes, particularly the . . .
LS: Can you restate again why? I didn’t quite follow you. What does it bespeak, in your
opinion?
Student: The particular importance of truth in this presentation of the virtues is due to
the fact that this particular . . . is aimed at the citizen. If it were aimed at the lawgiver,
truth would not be given such a high rating.
LS: That is a hard question. After all, the least one would have to say is [that] it is
addressed to some citizens. Because the citizen as citizen is surely inferior to the
lawgiver. But I believe that we will get a solution to that if we are only a bit patient. Now
let us go on where we left off, in 731c.
Reader:
[Ath.:] But, on the other hand, when men commit wrongs which are remediable, one
should, in the first place, recognize that every wrongdoer is a wrongdoer involuntarily;
for no one anywhere would ever voluntarily acquire any of the greatest evils, least of all
in his most precious possessions. And most precious in very truth to every man is, as we
have said, the soul. No one, therefore, will— (731c)
LS: “The most to be honored” would be a more literal translation. Do you see a difficulty
here in this sentence, in the light of what was said earlier? Yes?
Student: Earlier he has said that the soul came second.
LS: Third, even, sometimes.
Student: In the very beginning it seemed to come third.
LS: Ya, sure. So there is really a change of orientation taking place. We will come to that
later. Yes?
Reader:
[Ath.:] No one, therefore, will voluntarily admit into this most precious thing the greatest
evil and live possessing it all his life long. Now while in general the wrong-doer and he
that has these evils are to be pitied, it is permissible to show pity to the man that has evils
that are remediable, and to abate one’s passion and treat him gently, and not to keep on
raging like a scolding wife— (731c-d)

204

LS: Surely there is no distinction. The Greek word means woman. Why should wives be
singled out? I protest, and there are other husbands here who would perhaps agree with
me. But go on.
Reader:
but in dealing with the man who is totally and obstinately perverse and wicked one must
give free course to wrath. Wherefore we affirm that it behooves the good man to be
always at once spirited and gentle.vii (731d)
LS: Yes. you see here something else the famous Platonic doctrine: virtue is knowledge,
vice is ignorance. All vice, all crimes, are due to ignorance. Now if this follows, the only
proper attitude toward criminals is pity. You can’t hate them, they don’t know what they
do. What follows? Now these evils are either curable or they are incurable. In the case of
the curable, one can follow this pity to some extent. In the case of the incurable, one
simply cannot allow the pity, one must be eradicated. Again, the crucial implication is
[that] the conversion from vice to virtue can only be due to insight and not to punishment.
Student: I have a question. Why must one be angry and show wrath in these matters?
LS: I appeal to experience, either in life or on the screen. People different from a certain
type of criminals or detectives cannot kill in cold blood. Would you admit this as a
plausible, researchable hypothesis?
Student: I will for the sake of the argument, but I don’t think it is true. I personally
believe that any human being is capable of killing in cold blood.
LS: That I don’t know. I have seen some particular cases of cold blood—perhaps you are
a better psychologist than I am, but that I don’t know. But at any rate, let us assume that a
good man—a good man, as he puts it, who knows that these people really don’t know
what they are doing—can’t hate for this reason. But it is necessary to exterminate this
mass murderer, for instance. How can they come into that mood to the extent to which
they are willing to follow . . . Incidentally, that is a good Aristotelian teaching . . . Good
men must be able on the proper occasion to do this; and therefore the most proper
occasion, the most massive proper occasion would be this: where you see a fellow
shooting at everyone else, and you simply get angry and shoot at him and he stops his
business. But the main problem, again, is that of punishment. You see, the theme law and
the theme punishment are of course not identical and not even coextensive but they are
very closely related. When we speak of laws which are really effective, we use this
wonderful expression, “laws with teeth in it.” But what are laws with teeth in it? Which
provide proper sanctions. That is almost punishment. So law and punishment are close
subjects. And therefore, just as there is a problem with law—is a law reasonable or not,
because only as reasonable does it deserve full respect—there is also the question of the
reasonableness of punishment. To what extent are men made better, as we stated it
before, by punishment?
vii

In the Loeb: “at once passionate and gentle.”

205

Now then he goes on to speak in the sequel, 731d following, of the greatest evil. Now
that is always an important point. May I make this suggestion? If you read a writer, one
could perhaps say any writer who is not completely irresponsible, of course, it is a good
idea to see what does he explicitly call the greatest good and also what does he explicitly
call the greatest evil, and then you have the most general orientation as to what he is
driving at. And so a statement by Plato about the greatest evil is of course very important.
But he doesn’t speak here in 731d6 of the greatest evil simply, but the greatest evil inborn
in most men. And that he calls self-love. To define self-love: self-love means preferring
one’s own to the truth. He doesn’t say this is inborn in all men; there are people in whom
it is not inborn. This subject is enlarged later: preferring one’s own opinion—and of
course not opinion about whether this dog is brown or gray, only foolish people worried
about that—but rather about important subjects. Therefore preferring one’s own opinions
is identical with claiming omniscience, as it were. Omniscience means here knowledge of
the most important things—not, to repeat, about matters of gossip. I think it would be
very illuminating to contrast this passage with the biblical notion of pride, which is of
course not inborn in man according to the biblical teaching. Here this is inborn in most
men. Some men are born without this kind of self-love and, if I am not mistaken, one of
the reasons why Plato speaks of Socrates demonic thing is that Socrates was one of the
rare men in whom this great evil was not inborn. That is not the only reason, but one
essential characteristic of Socrates. Now in 732d8 to e3, we can read that perhaps; there
is a transition to another subject.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Thus, as regards the right character of institutions and the right character of
individuals, we have now laid down practically all the rules that are of divine sanction.
Those that are of human origin we have not stated as yet, but state them we must; for our
converse is with men, not gods. (732d-e)
LS: That is the transition. A beautiful phrase, isn’t it? We converse with human beings
and not with gods.5 [What is] human is pleasure and pain. And what we must know . . . is
not only what constitutes the noble life and that the most noble life is preferable, but also
that the noble life is pleasant, because otherwise we will be torn all the time between
nobility and pleasure. Then he discusses the alternative ways of life from the point of
view of pleasure and pain, and raises the question [of] which of these various ways of life
to choose from the point of view of pleasure. And he speaks in this context in 733e1 of
law which a man may make for himself on the basis of the calculation of pains and
pleasure. The translation is here misleading. It is based on a change in . . . 733, where is
that? In page 145, where he says “has made it into a private law for himself.” That would
be extremely interesting if this expression was to occur here, but if you look at the critical
apparatus on page 744 you see that this is an emendation by a classical scholar . . . But
still, that he calls it nevertheless a law which men make for themselves on the basis of
calculation of pleasures and pains is quite interesting. The whole problem of Bentham, by
the way, at least so far as the calculation of pleasures is concerned, is here developed. But
here the question is not the maximum of pleasure for the society but the maxim of
pleasure for the individual. That is, indeed, the great difference.

206

Now four pairs of ways of life are contrasted in 733e. I think I will . . . Mr. . . . was
worried by that. [LS writes on the blackboard] Here we have the moderate and the
opposite is here called the unreasonable. Then we get the reasonable, and that is
confronted with the cowardly. How strange. And then we get the courageous, which is
confronted with the intemperate. And finally, the healthy, confronted with the sick,
sickly. You see that is very strange, and you see, Mr. Sasseen, that you must really think
of the four virtues. It is a kind of schema which is always present and with which he
plays around, and one must see what it means. It is a very unreasonable order, as you see.
Now fortunately Plato—not only Plato, but Plato in particular—is an extremely decent
writer. By this I mean that he rewards if you read him carefully—not that you get a
solution all the time, sometimes . . . but he . . . solvable. I, for example, cannot solve all
of them, in fact, because of lack of knowledge, lack of imagination, lack of other things.
But here in this case I can solve it, because in 734d we find a repetition, and here from
this repetition it appears—I can only give you the result—that courage and practical
wisdom are treated as interchangeable. That is already indicated here by making
cowardice the opposite of reasonableness, or possessing of practical wisdom. And
cowardice and unreasonableness are also interchangeable. Now what does he mean by
that? We must never forget [that] Plato never gave such a clear and perfectly consistent
presentation of the different virtues as Aristotle did in the Ethics. He gives a sort of
sketch, and the most complete sketch is in the Republic, but which has great difficulties
even in the Republic. And we have seen the difficulties in the various arrangements in the
first book of the Laws, and it goes through the Laws and all the other dialogues. What
Aristotle says about the different virtues, incidentally, is known to Plato; that can be
shown. But Plato played around with them, because there is a certain inexactness
regarding these distinctions of the virtues which has a great plausibility for practical
purposes, but which is not truly exact.
Now to come to the question at hand: What enables him to bring practical wisdom, which
in Plato frequently stands for wisdom altogether, together with courage? This is not a
unique occurrence, because in the Republic we have this arrangement: whereas justice
and moderation are common to the whole citizen body, courage is left for an elite.
Therefore courage has a higher status. And wisdom is also left for an elite, a still more
respected elite. But that indicates also the particular closeness of courage and wisdom.
Student: Is it because a man cannot be wise unless brave?
LS: Ya. In other words, wisdom, at least in the theoretical sense, requires courage and
also a special kind of courage, more immediately than the other virtues. I mean, that you
must be in a crude way moderate goes without saying. If you are drunk you can’t think.
And also if you are afraid of everything, your worries and apprehensions prevent you
from thinking, that is surely true. But it is closer than that. A certain kind of courage is an
integral element of the pursuit of knowledge. It has something to do with that.
Then he gives an argument which proves only that the moderate life is by nature
preferable to the intemperate life, adding, however, the clause in 734b “if what he has

207
said is correct.” And then summarily he tries to show this regarding the three other noble
and base lives which he has mentioned. Immediately thereafter there is another transition,
734e to 735a.viii —where the calculus comes in. And the calculus is complicated by the
fact that there are certain very mild pleasures which can be had without pain and certain
very powerful pleasures which require some pain, a greater pain. That is also a problem
to be considered. What should you prefer: a rather even life, very mild pleasures and no
pain, or great pleasures with a lot of pepper in them—pain? That is surely part of the
whole problem of pleasure and pain.
Student: This is stated problematically here, I think.
LS: Where is it?
Student: In 733c to b, I think.
LS: 733b . . . We want the lesser pain with the greater pleasure, but a lesser pleasure
accompanied by a greater pain we do not wish. And then he speaks about the
complication caused by multitude, magnitude and intensity. And this also has to be
considered. Surely, is it not primarily clear that if you have a very intense pleasure of a
very intense, for example, smell, an intensive smell of a rose, and on the other hand you
have a very mild one, is it not at least a problem which is preferable from the point of
view of pleasure? You are thinking of Bacon’s problem, ya? Bacon taking the side of
Callicles versus Socrates? Yes, yes. But you see, the problem was known to Plato. And in
addition, Callicles himself proves that. Callicles states that the intense and violent
pleasures are preferable to the placid pleasures. That is a question. But I think it is not
more here than a statement of the problem. Now let us read 734e to 735a, which is the
other important transition here.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Thus far we have stated the prelude of our laws, and here let the statement end:
after the prelude must necessarily follow the tune—
LS: Because “prelude” is a term which was borrowed from music.
Reader:
or rather, to be strictly accurate, a sketch of the politeia. (734e)ix
LS: Of the laws of the regime, of the political order.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Now, just as in the case of a piece of webbing, or any other woven article, it is not
possible to make both warp and woof of the same materials, but the stuff of the warp
must be of better quality—for it is strong and is made firm by its twistings, whereas the
viii

There was a break in the tape at this point. The passage Strauss calls for is actually read just
below.
ix
In the Loeb: “of the State-organisation.”

208
woof is softer and shows a due degree of flexibility—from this we may see that in some
such way we must mark out those who are to hold high offices in the State and those who
are to hold low offices, after applying in each case an adequate educational test. For of
State organization there are two divisions. (734e-735a)
LS: Let me restate that: there are two kinds of the politeia. One is the establishment of
the magistracies, to each; the other are the laws which are given to the magistracies. That
is a very important passage also, the whole problem of what politeia means, and that is
paralleled by a remark in Aristotle’s Politics. Now the first division in every order is this:
magistracies, people who can command, can tell others to do this and that; and the laws,
according to which they can command. That is a fundamental distinction. And of the two,
as is indicated by this order, the magistracies take precedence. But now what about the
magistracies themselves? Are they not established by law? Think of the arrangements in
this country. And therefore is not law the overriding thing which includes the politeia?
That would be a very natural objection made by us today. The implicit answer to this
question given by Plato and Aristotle is this: On what does the establishment of the
magistracies depend?
Student: Good citizens who don’t—
LS: This applies to all regimes, not only the virtuous but the vicious as well. On what
does the establishment of the magistracies depend? It means the question: Who can
become a judge, who can become an executive? Yes?
Student: Could this be the principle of justice which is in the community?
LS: Yes, but on what does that depend? You are also speaking of every regime now?
Student: Yeah.
LS: The principles of justice which are law. But on what do these principles themselves
depend? That is an interesting point you make. And that is one of the difficulties which
we have in understanding Plato and Aristotle. You make one implicit promise, as you
will see immediately, and that is [that] the society is first. First you have the society plus
its values, as they say; but as you correctly say, its principles of justice. And then, on the
basis of that, the legal order, the constitutional order emerges, which is of course in the
first place a constitution regarding the magistracies, and then the specific laws which the
magistracies are supposed to apply. But that is exactly the point which Plato and Aristotle
question: that there can be a society preceding the regime, the political order. So from
their point of view you have first the establishment, let us say, of the constitution, as we
would say, that which speaks about the magistracies, and then the laws. But on what does
the constitution depend? They do not say, but I will state it very crudely: on the
distribution of power within the community, on the factual distribution of power within
the community. Which kind of people factually predominates.

209
Student: It seems to me, you know, I can agree with you that they don’t have a
community apart from the political community, but even granting this, I would say that
even what you are saying, the factual distribution of power is also a factual distribution—
I mean, there is a sense of what is right and wrong.
LS: What Plato and Aristotle contend is this: that the principles of justice predominating
in a community depend on this political fact. For example, there is a certain notion of
democratic justice and there is a certain notion of oligarchic justice. See Aristotle’s
Politics. Good. Now these notions can exist, or at least are known even to people who
live under absolute monarchs, but they are wholly ineffective there. They are effective in
a democracy, the democratic polity. The oligarchic notion is effective in an oligarchy.
Why? Their effectiveness depends on the existence of the democracy, in the one case,
and of the oligarchy in the other case. The fundamental fact is not the principles
themselves but that which makes possible their effectiveness, and that is the distribution
of power. And that is the reason why, before he turns to the polity proper and to the laws
regarding it, what now we call the constitution, he discusses the distribution of power in
the community in this form: the rich and the poor—which is the knotty thing.
Same Student: And then the question I would ask is this: Can you have a distribution of
power, can you speak of this unless you also have a regime in existence? In other words,
I am saying that the separability here is arbitrary.
LS: But what does this mean? That in any analysis of social phenomena from Plato’s and
Aristotle’s point of view, the ultimate which you reach and by going beyond which you
no longer speak about this social phenomena, is the regime. The constitution, in the sense
of the formulated laws regarding offices, that is secondary. The primary fact is the
character of the society with regard the power, we can put it . . . to bring it closer to
present-day language. That is the political fact. We can’t go back beyond it without
destroying the social character of the phenomenon.
Student: Agreed. But is not the character of the community in regard to power, what you
call the basic political reality, is not this the same thing as saying the sense of justice
predominant in the community?
LS: But why does it predominate? Why do these principles of justice, the democratic
principles, let us say, predominate in society A, whereas the oligarchic principles
predominate in society B?
Student: A person might say two answers: the first, by chance; and the other by some
divine establishment.
LS: No, I think—let me see. Why do the democrats say “One man, one vote,” or
whatever the formula may be?
Student: Because they have been shaped to see this.

210
LS: According to Aristotle . . . And the same applies to the oligarchs—that is, from their
point of view, a sufficient answer to this question. Now the great question for them is
how to find a society and to establish the precise character of the society in which the
self-interest of the ruling element coincides with the common good of all men in the
society. That is their problem.
Student: This sounds like Alexander Hamilton more than it sounds like Aristotle.
LS: But I’m sorry, read the third book of the Politics. And of course one also has to
consider books 7 and 8, where Aristotle develops this in detail. The solution to the
political problem is one in which the ruling element is superior by human excellence to
the ruled element, and not superior from the point of view of number, or from the point of
view of wealth, or from any other point of view [of which] you might think. But the
specifically political thing is that in Plato’s and Aristotle’s view it can in fact only be a
part which can be ruling, and they would say that a democracy is in fact the rule, as a
democracy, the rule of a part, namely, of the many. What we understand by democracy,
and we mean something good by it, is of course that a democracy transcends that, that
there are certain practical considerations which recommend democratic institutions, you
know, but it is not simply a regime in the interest of the mere majority as
majority . . . there are also people who say that, naturally. But that would be a problem
because then one could say: Why the majority?
Same Student: But to get back to this other point. What we are doing is talking about the
beginnings, not so much the beginnings in time, but the essential beginnings. We are
talking now about is the most fundamental. And what you have said is that this is the
factual distribution of power—that this is the most fundamental. Now—
LS: That is the political phenomenon.
Student: Okay. Now the problem I have is this. If, in this actual power situation, each
group sees its own interest—
LS: But the question is whether there are not cases in which the interest of a group is
identical with the common interest. Now the objection which you can make is that there
is a lot of hypocrisy going on in Plato and Aristotle. That would be the typically modern
objection. But still, if you take seriously what they mean, is not a group—let us take the
extreme but clear case, a group dedicated to virtue. The self-interest of that group is
virtue . . . The group is constituted by the dedication to virtue. You can say that means
rising so high that we lose sight of politics for other reasons (that is not now our question,
but that is what they mean), whereas if people are dedicated to something other than
virtue, in that case the self-interest is really this kind of bad thing of which Plato just
spoke. The self-interest of the ruling group which is dedicated to virtue, to repeat, is
essentially different from any other self-interest. But it has this character—why does
Aristotle say all the time there must be a certain proportion between the physical or
military power of those in sympathy with the regime and those opposing it, and all these
other kinds of things? Why does he demand that in his city, which he describes in the

211
seventh and eighth book[s], there must be the armed men, the heavily armed men, and the
men who have access to government, and the men who are the possessors of wealth, must
coincide?
Student: All right. Perhaps we are in agreement after all.
LS: Is not this great? [Laughter] But one must not—the great difficulty when we speak of
politics as distinguished from the merely private life is that we have to take into
consideration certain crude things. Virtue itself is somewhat crude; for example, the mere
linkup between virtue and wealth as it appears in the political connection is a good
indication of that.
Student: . . .
LS: But Alexander Hamilton is not such a wicked man.
Student: Oh, no [laughter], except his view, you have to admit, while it might have
certain similarities is being told quite differently.
LS: One can simply say this. Alexander Hamilton, I believe, understood everything of
Plato and Aristotle. He only did not make the clear distinction between virtue and wealth
[LS chuckles], which Plato and Aristotle did—which is not negligible, but 6it is very
important, I believe. But on the other hand, the other things in Plato and Aristotle he
understood very, very clearly.
Same Student: Okay, Now when we have the coincidence of group interest, or however
you want to put it, in the virtuous man with the common good. But now we are talking
about the regime itself and the predominance of this in this regime. And was this not the
question you asked: What causes this element to be predominant?
LS: Ya, sure. But then you give the answer, the Platonic answer, i.e., that depends on
chance. The legislator cannot make himself a citizen body; he has to take it as it is given
to him, and from this point of view that is a matter of chance. But that is, if I may use the
language with which you are familiar, a metaphysical explanation of the fundamental
political fact. You go beyond the political as political by making this statement, which is
perfectly legitimate, but within the political context it does not come up.
Same Student: So then we can say that within the political context the fundamental
thing, or the first thing, is power.
LS: Ya, sure, but I would say distribution of power. Not to come into a wholly senseless
discussion—that we find power also we know in private life, in classrooms, in industrial
enterprises, and so on—but this power, which necessarily is public power, existing in
broad daylight, adorned with the majesty of the public. If you mean this by power, surely.

212
Same Student: In the sense which you are talking here, transcending, standing outside
this regime and looking down where the virtuous element has the power. And we can call
this a regime, right, because it is a community in which this element predominates and
their sense of justice then proceeds to order the community even further. All right, then
the key to the whole thing, the fundamental law is not law but factual power in the
political context.
LS: As a thinking man, you necessarily will go beyond that and raise the question, for
example: Are the oligarchic or democratic principles of justice the true principles? And if
not, what are the true ones? Which are the specific defects?
Same Student: In which case, then, are you still in the political? Or haven’t you
transcended the political . . .
LS: No, by raising, from the question of this particular regime here and now, the question
of the best regime, I still remain within the political context. On the contrary, from
Plato’s and Aristotle’s point of view you are really in a very narrow sense political if you
absolutize the given regime here and now. You cannot have a proper judgment, political
judgment, of a given regime without having a vision of the best regime, which Plato, by
the way, makes clear in our context. We raise the question all the time that we must look
at this perfection which we will not get, or otherwise we cannot diagnose properly what
we have at hand.
Now we still have quite a few things to do. So he wants to turn to the laws of the polity,
of the regime, but he doesn’t do that. He turns first to a preliminary subject, which he
calls the purge (that communist word, the purge) or the separation of the good from the
bad. And the question he has in mind is the composition of the citizen body. The
legislator, consider[ing] in perfect freedom, would pick the people. In the case of a
fantastic perfection, he would pick only men who have the strongest inclination and gifts
for virtue and compose the society of them. But of course such a complete freedom never
exists, but that doesn’t exclude a certain influence. Let us be really practical. What do
these people who have such a strong view in favor of the immigration laws to this
country have in mind? They may give a wrong answer to that question. I am not
sufficiently familiar with the issue. But the question is exactly the same as the question
which Plato raises: How should the citizen body be composed? To some extent, that is
the general point, the legislator does have an influence over the composition of the citizen
body—never that complete influence that he could turn around and pick future citizens of
his city as . . . that of course never takes place. In this connection, you will see in 735d8
to e5, there is a brief passage.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The best purge is painful, like all medicines of a drastic nature—the purge which
hales to punishments by means of justice linked with vengeance, crowning the vengeance
with exile or death: it, as a rule, clears out the greatest criminals when they are incurable
and cause serious damage to the State. A milder form of purge is one of the following
kind. (735d-e)

213

LS: And so on. So you see that is very important. The best purge is not the mild purge.
Now the word mild—or “meek,” used here—is used in an earlier passage synonymously
with moderate, with this key word going through the whole book. The best purge is not
the moderate purge. That is one additional reason why this combination of wisdom and
courage, which includes also such things as killing, in the extreme case, is made here.
You remember, perhaps, the earlier discussion we had about these three (these are in 627)
schemes. You know the three schemes: the first order, extinction of the wicked; second,
rule of the good over the wicked; the third, the reconciliation of the good and the wicked.
And the reconciliation of the good and the wicked, that is what we call the rule of law.
That is the mildest, there is no question, and the most humane. But it is also a problem, of
course. Plato would in all practical cases advise the third one, because he was a humane
man. But being a thoughtful man, he couldn’t help reflecting on this problem; you know,
sometimes the dissatisfaction with this compromise among the good with the wicked gets
on people’s nerves, and then you get outbursts of radical reforms—that the good should
really control the wicked. The extreme form, the extinction of the wicked, is only a kind
of utopia from this point of view. But we must keep this in mind throughout.
Student: Does this have anything to do with the Stranger’s preferring a tyrant . . .
LS: Sure. That has an obvious connection here.
Student: . . . tyrannic power . . .
LS: Sure. That is the same problem.
Student: Not to be facetious, but do you think Stalin had this particular problem in mind?
LS: No, I don’t believe that Stalin read Plato ever. [Laughter] I do not know. But this
problem—now let me put it this way: that the good should be made dominant in a
society—I mean these are, of course, wholly un-Marxist [ideas], never forget that. But if
we look at it from the outside and say we interpret Marxism from our point of view and
disregard dialectical materialism and all this sort of thing, then of course quite externally
one could say that: that Marxism claims to establish the rule of the good over the wicked.
To that extent there is a similarity of the problem, surely. But the question is only: What
about this claim, the reality of this claim, the validity of this claim? And that is the reason
why Plato was in fact in favor of constitutional government, as we would call it, a
moderate and humane form of government. But he did this with his eyes open. The
compromise between the good and the wicked, which is a very tough formula but a very
realistic formula, [but] it also states a very terrible problem. It is not only then the
property—the crudification of virtue, by being allied with and becoming recognizable
only through property, as I tried to state it before—it is also this more urgent thing, the
traffic with evil, to use a moralistic expression. And not only as a casual thing, you know,
should one deal with Tito and Franco, from different points of view, trafficking with evil.
You know this sort of discussion. That is a mild issue, only here and now in a given case.
But the question is whether political life as such does not rest on a fundamental

214
concession to what from a strictly moral point of view would be called evil, and then that
the law, paradoxically, protects evil. What a strange thing. And yet we all, I believe at
least all moderate people, say “yes.” But still it is a paradox. One must not be selfcomplacent about it, although practically one cannot change it. But one must see [that]
the expectations from the practical meaning of such theoretical reflections is that they
influence decisively one’s expectations from politics. If this is inevitable practically,
something of this kind, then the expectations will be reduced and we become cured from
a certain disease of the soul which demands too much perfection on a level on which it
cannot really be expected. That is, I think, the background of the whole thing. Yes?
Student: Which brings up the question then that the best purification, in other words, the
best arrangement is not a political judgment.
LS: Of course it is a political judgment, but on deeper reflection it proves to be a wrong,
namely, premature political judgment. A wrong political judgment is a political fact.
Same Student: But a wrong political judgment, then, cannot make it the best form of
purification.
LS: But look, the good and the bad flute players—Aristotle’s [example]—belong to the
same genus. The good flute player is miles apart from the bad flute player, but the fact
that they are both flute players is very important for understanding either of them.
Similarly, a very wise political order and a very foolish political order are miles apart,
and yet they belong to the same genus, say, political arrangements. That remains
assuredly in the realm of political judgment.
Same Student: But the thing I mean is that if this is essentially bound up with the
political, as you say, if this is true, then the best political purification can never be
extermination of evil. That would mean the extermination ipso facto of the political.
LS: But if something which at a first glance may seem superior proves to be on reflection
something marginal and in now—[LS writes on the blackboard], say, here, it still belongs
to that. The consideration of that, the awareness of it, is essential for the understanding of
political things and is immanent in it.
Same Student: This I undoubtedly admit. The only thing I’m arguing is the continuing
judgment that this is the best thing, but it is unrealizable, you know: would that we could
kill everybody who was evil. It seems to me that this can never remain, on this second
look, as best.
LS: Surely not. Oh, if you mean that, surely not. That is quite true. That is quite true,
therefore the consequences of that is that the best political solution is not the best human
solution. Within politics there is a definite ceiling which cannot be transcended politically
but which very well may be transcended by the individual in his own life. That is another
matter. But this is of course of crucial importance. The understanding of the limitations of

215
the political is perhaps the most important thing we can know about the political,
because . . .
Now I would like to continue my survey. In the immediate sequel, he speaks of the pillar
of the polis—“pillar” means of course not the edifice; it means only the foundation, not
more—no conflict between the rich and poor. No creditor and debtor class, for example,
and so on. The question of property, in other words, is the most fundamental problem
here. But it becomes political. That is the difference between the economic interpretation
of history, as it is called, and [for] people like Plato and Aristotle and quite a few later
thinkers, that is really conceived of as the matter on which one has to act and not as the
authoritative thing. The political is not a function of the economic, if we call that the
economic; but the economic is the material on which the statesman has to act. That the
statesman, the legislator is severely limited by the available economic situation is of
course not denied.
So the question is then property. What is the right kind of distribution? And the first
answer given is: the most equal distribution possible. The most equal distribution. You
see how much Plato allows for the democratic principle. But that is also, I am sorry to
say, only a stage in the process. He will modify that. And the answer is each citizen has a
lot of land, land being the most important thing. And 5,040 citizens; 5,040 lots. The
reasoning given is very simple: 5,040 is wonderfully divisible, and it is divisible by every
number up to ten inclusive. And it it is divisible by twelve, of course, and there are also
factors which you can multiple . . . And then we come to that great statement in 739
about the deviation from the Republic. The schema of the Republic is not as such rejected
explicitly as impossible, but here he says we deviate from that. Why should we deviate
from it? The answer given here is this: The members of the commonwealth of the
Republic would have to be gods or children of the gods, and we deal here with human
beings. This is of course an admission. You can say that Plato regarded the scheme of the
Republic as humanly impossible, and that I think would appear from a closer study of the
Republic itself. Now there are a few more points.
You see also one important point. When he describes the scheme of the Republic, he does
not say a word about the rule of the philosophers. So when Aristotle in his criticism of
Plato’s Republic doesn’t mention the rule of philosophers, he simply follows Plato. That
is not an arbitrary disregard of Plato. The rule of philosophers is here disregarded, but
here in the Laws it has a special reason. Philosophy is altogether disregarded. I do not
remember now a single passage where the word philosopher occurs in the original. I
don’t know it, but I can’t recall a single passage. That the translator and the interpreters
speak all the time of philosophy, that I know.
Now he speaks here of a first, second and third polis in this connection, at the end of this
passage.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Wherefore one should not look elsewhere for a model constitution, but hold fast to
this one, and with all one’s power seek the constitution that is as like to it as possible.

216
That constitution which we are now engaged upon, if it came into being, would be very
near to immortality, and would come second in point of merit. (739d)
LS: No, second in point of unity. In other words, the great recommendation of the
Republic is that it is unified to the highest possible extent. And this would be unified in
the second degree.
Reader:
The third we shall investigate hereafter, if the gods so will.x (739e)
LS: That has been frequently discussed. He says we will complete [it], if god wills. That
has been frequently discussed, and I think the meaning is perfectly clear. What they will
get in actual fact will be the third. The schema which is now developed in speech by the
Athenian Stranger, that is the second best. But what Clinias will do will of course be
below that. We can here for a moment reflect on—incidentally, the formula about the
Republic is absolutely crucial and one cannot study that frequently enough. The scheme
is described that it makes common even those things which are by nature private, in a
way. Now this is very important. There are things which are by nature private. The most
massive example is of course the body: my toothache cannot be shared. And also the
pleasures as such cannot be shared.
Student: What about the first sentence in book 5: “Of all a man’s own belongings, the
most divine is his soul, since it is most his own.” [726]
LS: Yes, that is true, in a way. But on the other hand, you see here also that eyes, ears
and hands are induced to see and opine and hear and act. The common things, they
become communal. Now what he has in mind, of course, is very familiar and well known
to us today. The famous story that by propaganda people can be induced to adopt
opinions, the same opinions, all. They have no longer opinions of their own. But other
things he does not mention: he does not mention all parts of the body here. For example,
think of pleasures and pains. To what extent can they be simply physai idea? But you see
also that this can have another meaning. The soul, and especially the mind, is concerned
with the common. The truth is by its nature non-private. It may in fact be private; that is
another matter, but that is really accidental. The truth as truth is the common good. Now
there are certain things which are by their very nature private and noncommunicable, and
the most simple cases I think are bodily pleasure and pain. Bodily pleasures and pains.
Even if people enjoy themselves together, they drink together and enjoy it, each man’s
pleasure is his pleasure. Take thinking as a simple case, i.e., mathematics. They study a
mathematical demonstration together. They really think the same thing, the identically
same thing, otherwise they wouldn’t understand the demonstration. And that applies also
to other theoretical subjects, although mathematics is the clearest case.
Now here we can reflect for one moment about the two characters of the Laws in
contradistinction to the Republic: in the first place, communism in the Republic; the
abolition of communism in the Laws. Private family and property are characteristic of the
x

In the Loeb: “if God so will.”

217
Laws. And the second point is no tyrannical establishment in the Laws. No tyrannical
establishment. In the Republic you have in fact a tyrannical establishment, namely, you
know, philosophers become kings. But what do the philosophers do? They expel
everyone older than ten. Throw them out, rusticate them. That’s a tyrannical act. And the
last point: the scheme of the Laws is presented in the fourth book as the rule of law and in
the highest sense, rule of god; in the Republic, clearly the rule of philosophers.
Now after we have settled for private property it is made clear immediately afterward that
there is no private property strictly speaking in the land, or not absolutely speaking. The
land is entailed: it remains within the family. And the original distribution is meant to be
for all times. But a great difficulty arises. One citzen, one plot. But what about the next
generation? Nature does not act so kindly as to give one heir to one plot, but sometimes
no heir and sometimes many heirs; and therefore a great difficulty arises, and the only
limitation which is here suggested is, again, no purchase or sale of the plot. But it
appears, I think, from the context that this can really not be avoided. There can be severe
deprivation inflicted on the purchasers and so on, for example, loss of civic honors or loss
of certain civic honors, but that remains a great difficulty, and herefore Plato is compelled
to make this provision that a man can own more than his plot up to the fourth, up to four
plots. But that maximum must be preserved. And so you of course get a division of the
community into rich and poor and, as we shall see in the next book, the polity makes
allowance for that: the rich have a higher say in that community than the poor. We will
take this up next time. Ya?
Student: Four times the amount of the plot would be not in landed property but in
movable property. I think the prohibition against the selling of the lot is absolute.
LS: I really don’t remember at the moment.
Student: One is allowed to acquire movable property.
LS: No gold and silver, but other things.
Student: The legal tender of the polis.
LS: Someone raised their finger?
Student: It is said in the remark that Sparta had had that law and that it was a complete
failure.
LS: If you think it out, you can easily see what kind of complications it creates and that it
must work very severe hardships in many cases. You know? And it depends also on the
very simple point, for example, war: considerable loss of the male population of the next
generation, and the girls remain around, and then heiresses in demand. And that was the
great difficulty for Sparta, of which Aristotle speaks.
Now there are one or two other points which I should like to mention. The political
recognition of wealth, this very famous statement in 744b to d. And finally, a word about
this passage. One point we must not forget: at the end of the dialogue a great paradoxy

218
comes out. The general policy of this commonwealth is the discouragement of trade in
favor of farming. And yet at the same time something is encouraged which goes
ordinarily better together with trade rather than with farming, and that is arithmetic. The
mathematical peoples, the Egyptians and the Phoenicians, were trading people, especially
the Phoenicians, rather than farming people. And that is the sense of the paradoxy which
is very strong at the end of this book. And this will lead later on in the seventh book to
the education in mathematics which plays such a great role.
There are only two passages which I would like briefly to discuss. One is at the end of
745, where the paragraph begins.
Reader:
[Ath.:] But we must not noticexi —that all the arrangements now described will never be
likely to meet with such favorable conditions that the whole programme can be carried
out according to plan. This requires that the citizens will raise no objection to such a
mode of living together, and will tolerate being restricted for life to fixed and limited
amounts of property and to families such as we have stated, and being deprived of gold
and of the other things which the lawgiver is clearly obliged by our regulations to forbid,
and will submit also to the arrangements he has defined for country and city, with the
dwellings set in the centre and around the circumference,—almost as if he were telling
nothing but dreams, or moulding, so to say, a city and citizens out of wax. These
criticisms are not altogether unfair, and the lawgiver should reconsider the points that
follow. (745e-746a)
LS: We can leave it at that. So this criticism is not altogether unfair; these grave
restrictions of freedom which are imposed. Of course we do not know precisely,
however, what is the difficulty from Plato’s point of view. You see, there is this very
general and vague statement and they will be deprived “of gold and of other things,” of
which the legislator will evidently deprive the citizens. Which other things are included
among them is not elaborated; one would have to go into that. That, I think, is the
solution to this problem. Also to another textual difficulty here.
And the last point is only this. At the end, in 747d, when he speaks of the natural
conditions which have to be considered and where he refers to wind, water, and food,
which are bound to affect the character of the community, he addresses this very
emphatically in d1 to Megillus and Clinias. And of course only Clinias answers. I
wondered why Megillus is here also addressed in this way, and I could think only of one
point: that in a very striking statement of Megillus in the first or second book, Megillus
praised the nature of the Athenian: that the Athenians alone, he said, are good, excellent
in a natural way and not in a conventional, artificial manner—if they are good. This may
have something to do with that. But that we cannot settle now.

xi

In the Loeb: “But we must by all means notice this”

219

1

Deleted “what do they call”
Deleted “the.”
3
Moved “too.”
4
Deleted “you know”
5
Deleted “This.”
6
Deleted “on the other hand”
2

220

Session 9: February 12, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] Now a few points. Testing, the testing of officials—is there
really no indication whatever there in what it consists? i
Student: An early book, book 4, had mentioned that it was an educational test and also,
as I mentioned at the beginning, it was a test of the individual all through his life. But I
don’t think that it is ever made clearer.
LS: I did not pay special attention to it because this was a very common practice in
Greek cities, and you can learn, for example, from Aristotle’s presentation of the
Athenian constitution and other easily accessible sources what it meant. For example,
such questions were considered: [first], military service, which includes of course
whether one didn’t run away and lose one’s shield; second, that you fulfilled your
financial obligations to the city, paid your taxes, and so on; third, and very important,
whether a man took proper care of the graves of his parents or ancestors. Surely other
things would have to be considered, but this is only an indication of what that testing
meant. You had to be a citizen in good standing from the most important considerations.
That of course is only a kind of flooring: it is not the ceiling, the perfect citizen. You
know, that is a grave question: you can easily find out whether someone was bankrupt or
shirked his military duty, but whether he is truly a public-spirited man, that is a
complicated matter.
Then you didn’t comment on, but only stated, this remark that women are a greater
problem in civic life than men. How come? Is this not odd?
Student: He did not elaborate on it, so I didn’t. You have earlier suggested the reason I
think. He says the women are frail, I believe that is the term. In any case, they are
inclined to talk when men aren’t around and sort of get together and then influence . . .
LS: A kind of nuisance. But I believe we can perhaps take up this question later. But it is
quite remarkable that it is the same Plato who in the Republic demands the full equality
of the two sexes. Someone has to see how these things work together.
The last point regarding your paper is this. You rightly said that these basic needs or
desires of men have to be controlled by fear, by law, and by true reasoning. That is what
Plato said. I mention this because England, who is the commentator on the Laws, in his
analysis of the sixth book speaks of fear, law, and philosophy.ii There is no reference to
philosophy there, as we have said often before. And I am still waiting in my present
reading for the first occurrence of the word philosophy. Hitherto I have not come across a
single passage. If anyone has, I would be grateful if he would tell me.
i

Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded. This session and the remainder of the transcript is based upon the original transcript.
ii
The Laws of Plato, ed. Edwin Bourdieu England (Longmans, Green & Co., 1921), vol. 1, 636.

221

Now first a word about the plan of the whole book, which on the whole you discerned
correctly. The first part deals with the magistracies, and the second part deals with laws,
i.e., with the beginning of the laws, because laws will not be the content for the rest of the
work. Now regarding magistracies the difficulty arises to which you referred: 1 Plato
treats the judges together with the magistrates proper, but he has a feeling that the judges
are not simply magistrates. How did you understand that, this uneasiness about the simple
subsumption of the judges under the magistrates?
Student: I think because they make decisions not only as to what the law is but as to the
facts of the case, and in that they are making something other than the official type
decision, which they also make.
LS: Yes, but a magistrate is not a legislator. For example, on the lowest level the
policeman on the corner is a magistrate. He tells you not to walk on a particular street or
not to park your car here. That is the low level of the magistrate’s functions. What is the
essential difference between any functions of telling people or forbidding or
commanding, and the judge? Plato does not elaborate that. We are so familiar with the
distinction between the executive on all levels and the judicial that we take it for granted.
Student: The judge punishes these others.
LS: He also commands, doesn’t he? But what is the difference?
Student: The judge makes law in two ways. One, in applying general principles to
specific cases he is bound, in a sense, to make law. But more profoundly, when he has to
apply an existing principle of law to an exceptional case, in this case he may have to give
a dispensation from the law, in order perhaps to apply another principle of the existing
law.
LS: I do not believe this is it. Plato makes a clear distinction between legislation and the
judicial function. Any seeming lawmaking involved in passing judicial decisions would
be essentially different from legislation from his point of view, surely. Does it not have
something to do [with the fact] that in every judicial decision individuals are named? I
mean, the policeman on the corner takes care of anyone, any car owner, etc., but the
judge passes judgment always on individuals. The individuals may be a group of
individuals, but that wouldn’t affect the issue. I believe that is what Plato has in mind.
But perhaps we find later on a more illuminating passage.
Now as regards the section on laws in the sixth book, I would say it consists clearly of
three main themes, by which I do not deny the great variety of other themes to which Mr.
____ referred. The first is marriage, the second is slavery, and the third is common meals,
especially for women—especially because that is the innovation suggested, and therefore
the emphasis is on that. Now let us turn to a clearer discussion.

222
But first I must apologize for two remarks I made last time where I was not clear enough.
The first was the question regarding that passage in 793 where Plato speaks of those
things which are by nature private, and I had said this means the body. And you
questioned that. But I can only say this. In the passage itself, Plato mentions only parts of
the body. You can say that is not sufficient, surely: one has to consider the soul too. But
one has to start first from the most massive fact: Why does he mention here only parts of
the body among those things which are by nature private? And the second point concerns
my somewhat extended discussion with Mr. ___. Now what Mr. ___ contended is that the
polity cannot be the ultimate. Well, in one sense, it is of course true, and I believe I said
this2 [at] the time. The political life necessarily points beyond itself. It is not a closed
circle: somewhere there is a hole, that is clear, and that is crucial for the understanding of
Plato as well as of Aristotle, that there is such a hole. But that toward which it points [LS
writes on the blackboard] —the private life on the highest level is the speculative life.
That is absolutely true. The modern notion is rather (of course not your notion, Mr. ___,
but rather the prevalent notion) that there is a kind of political system—something
everyone admits—but they would say the hole is here. [LS points to the blackboard] This
is society, the matrix, out of which it comes. This I should have made clearer last time.
That is the difference. I mean, that there is no complete, watertight, closedness of the
political there is true, but it depends very much [on] where you see that important hole. I
believe that the difficulty you had is connected with the following fact. Now this whole
problem of the political, of the difficulty of the political, can be stated as follows—and
we will find some evidence for it today again: that there is an element of the essentially
nonrational, or of what is against nature, in the political. To use a simple formula: In the
political sphere the higher must bow to the lower. That is the paradox of the political. Not
in every case, of course, but in principle. On the basis of revealed religion that is not so
because there the revealed order—which from the point of view of the classical
philosophers of course would be the law—is suprarational. Such a suprarational social
order does not exist in Plato and Aristotle. Good. I think that is the root of our difficulty.
But we will get some specimens of that today.
Now let us begin at the beginning, or near the beginning at any rate, in 752a (page 395).
If you read that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Yet, “with the hand on the plough,” as they say, “there is no looking back.” And
so it must be now with you and me; for you, as you tell me, have given your pledge to the
Cretan nation that you, with your nine colleagues, will devote yourselves to the founding
of that State; and I, for my part, have promised to lend you aid in the course of our
imaginative sketch. And indeed I should be loth to leave our sketch headless— (751d752a)
LS: What he calls “imaginative sketch” is, more literally translated, our present (or the
present) telling of a myth, mythologia. And later on, in the immediate following sentence,
he speaks also of a myth of what they are doing. That is an expression which occurs more
than once in the Laws, and also in the Republic, if I remember well, as a description of
the best regime. Why can it be called a myth? I mean, if someone says, “Well, that is a

223
kind of urbanity,” he deprecates what he is doing. That is not quite sufficient; there are
other ways. For example, sometimes he speaks of the play or the game in which they
indulge. Why does he call it myth? There is a stricter meaning to that. What is a myth? Or
to what genus of things does a myth belong?
Student: Lies.
LS: Yes, but there are other lies. If someone says, “I haven’t stolen that,” you wouldn’t
call that a myth, although it is a lie or may be a lie. Well, more generally, it is in the first
place a speech; that is the genus. But it is a speech of something which is not, at least not
as stated in the myth. Now any such blueprint is a speech of what is not. This society as
depicted does not exist. There are some later references to that in 768 to 769, where the
incompleteness of what they are doing is emphasized. Now this incompleteness means
that of course, as stated, it is unworkable: it cannot be. Therefore, in a somewhat broader
sense of the term “myth,” in a justifiable enlargement of the meaning, one can very well
call it a myth. Of course one would have to understand also the difference between this
kind of myth and other kinds of myths. But that makes . . . Now since we are just at that,
let us read the immediate sequel just as a specimen of that.
Reader:
[Clin.:] I heartily approve of what you say, Stranger.
[Ath.:] And what is more, I shall act as I say to—
LS: That is what the Athenian says?
Student: Yes, I was repeating it.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And what is more, I shall act as I say to the best of my power.
[Clin.:] By all means let us do as we say. (752a)
LS: You see, one can easily overlook these little things. What do we learn from them that
we didn’t know before? This question of course we can unfortunately never raise in the
proper manner in this course, because we proceed much too fast. But if one wants to
understand Plato, one must of course assume that he didn’t want to fill lines—you see, he
didn’t get a dollar for a line so that he would simply want to fill it up. Now let us reflect
here for one moment on this, only as a specimen, to see what this means. The Athenian
says we must do the deed, which means here we must complete the myth. It is not
sufficient to leave it as unfinished as it is hitherto. The Cretan, in his reply, uses another
term which also means doing in a wide sense, but it is not the same term. He speaks of
poiein, which is the root of the Greek word for poetry, as you know, [and] for production
in general. I do not pretend to be able to explain this passage, but one would have to start
toward the understanding from this distinction which is made by the Athenian speaking
of doing a deed and Clinias using a term which reminds us of poetry. But this only as an
example of the infinite variety of things which we simply cannot even take notice of here.

224
Now he turns then near the beginning to the question of the law-wardens—more literally,
the guardians of the law. The term reminds us naturally of the guardians in the Republic.
This was an Athenian institution, just as were the four property classes of which we had
seen last time, so that is of great importance for the meaning of the Laws as a whole.
There are many more. If you would look up the commentaries—or even better, read
Aristotle’s Constitution of Athens—you could see how many Athenian things have been
embodied here. The Athenian brings Athenian institutions into Crete. He does not come
to Crete in order to find there the most perfect law. On the contrary, he improves Crete
with Athenian means, but—and that is important—with old-fashioned Athenian means.
These are the institutions characteristic of predemocratic Athens, Solonic Athens, not of
the Athenian democracy. And that is a major part of the whole work. To say this book is
addressed primarily to Athenians and therefore Plato wrote a rather Athenian code
imputes to Plato a complete absence of artistic sense. After all, the Athenianizing here
must make sense within the dialogue. And therefore it means an old Athenian
philosopher, who by some whims of fortune was driven to Crete, would of course not sit
still there but do the best thing he could under the circumstances, and that would be—
given such a fortunate occurrence that he meets Clinias and Clinias has this
commission—[that] he would try to Athenianize him within the limits possible.
In 753b5, when he speaks now of elections, it seems as if the electors of voters must be
bearers of heavy arms if they are not even knights. Now this is the Aristotelian definition
of what he calls the polity. You know, in Aristotle’s scheme there are six. It won’t do any
harm if I remind some of you: kingship/tyranny; aristocracy/oligarchy; polity/democracy.
That is Aristotle’s scheme. This is the good democracy, which means of course
democracy based on a limited franchise, the franchise being limited to those who can
equip themselves with heavy armor. So they must have some property. Plato seems to
make a suggestion in this direction here, but later on in 755e and 756d we find references
to the3 light-armed as also voters. So it is in a way more democratic to that extent than
Aristotle’s polity is, although this doesn’t mean that it is not very undemocratic in other
respects. And this whole question of democracy comes up 4particularly clearly in 756b to
e, page 409, bottom.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The Boulé (or “Council”) shall consist of thirty dozen—as the number 360 is
well-adapted for the sub-divisions: they shall be divided into four groups; and 90
councillors shall be voted for from each of the property-classes. First, for councillars
form the highest property-class all the citizens shall be compelled to vote, and whoever
disobeys shall be fined with the fine decreed. When these have been voted for, their
names shall be recorded. On the next day those from the second class shall be voted for,
the procedure being similar to that on the first day. On the third day, for councillors from
the third class anyone who chooses shall vote; and the voting shall be compulsory for
members of the first three classes, but those of the fourth and lowest class shall be lot off
the fine, in case any of them do not wish to vote. On the fourth day, for those from the
fourth and lowest class, all shall vote; and if any member of the third or fourth class does
not wish to vote, he shall be let off the fine; but any member of the first or second class
who fails to vote shall be fined— (756c-d)

225

LS: Now do you understand the idea? What is it? Is it not very fair of Plato? The poor
people are not fined and the rich people are fined.
Student: My interpretation of that is that he is more interested in having the richer
classes participate in the elections, the higher classes, than the lower classes because he
feels that their participation will be more conducive to good laws.
LS: In other words, that is a clear attempt to give a greater privilege to the wealthy, to
assure the preponderance of the wealthy. There is no question about that. And Aristotle’s
remark in the second book of the Politics that this is an oligarchic, plutocratic scheme is
by no means unfounded. This is shocking to us, naturally, and therefore we must hear
how Plato justifies that. Now a bit later, the next paragraph.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The selection of officials that is thus made will form a mean between a monarchic
constitution and a democratic— (756e)
LS: You see the old idea of the mixed constitution, which we have discussed before. But
this must be properly understood. That doesn’t mean that you get a monarchic institution
here. For example, one chief executive would be a monarchic institution—that is not the
point—but the monarchic principle and the democratic principle must both be
represented. And what is the democratic principle?
Student: Counting heads, etc.
LS: And what is the device, the simplest device, for getting that?
Student: The lot.
LS: The lot. Because the lot doesn’t distinguish persons. What is the monarchic
principle?
Student: The political justice, the sort of distributive justice.
LS: But what did he say in a former passage, which we discussed, that there were three
considerations: freedom, strength and good sense. But what stood for the monarchic
principle?
Student: Strength.
LS: Strength. So let us keep this in mind. Now read on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] and midway between these our constitution should always stand. For slaves will
never be friendly with masters, nor bad men with good, even when they occupy equal

226
positions—for when equality is given to unequal things, the resultant will be unequal,
unless due measure is applied; and it is because of these two conditions that political
organisations are filled with feuds. There is an old and true saying that “equality produces
amity” which is right well and fitly spoken; but what the equality is which is capable of
doing this is a very troublesome question, since it is very far from being clear. For there
are two kinds of equality which, though identical in name, are often almost opposites in
their practical results. The one of these any State or lawgiver is competent to apply in the
assignment of honours—namely, the equality determined by measure, weight and
number,—by simply employing the lot to give even results in the distributions; but the
truest and best form of equality is not an easy thing for everyone to discern. It is the
judgment of Zeus, and men it never assists save in small measure, but in so far as it does
assist either States or individuals, it produces all things good; for it dispenses more to the
greater and less to the smaller, giving due measure to each according to nature—
LS: To their nature.
Reader:
and with regard to honours also, by granting the greater to those that are greater in
goodness, and the less to those of the opposite character in respect of goodness and
education, it assigns in proportion what is fitting to each. Indeed, it is precisely this which
constitutes for us “political justice”— (756e-757c)
LS: That is a difficult sentence to translate. One could also understand it as follows. I
mean, either it is translated here this way, and then Plato would speak here of political
right or political justice, and that would be a term which Aristotle uses in very important
passages in the fifth book of the Ethics, also with reference to our problem. But it might
also mean this: as far as we are concerned, the political, meaning what is politically wise,
is always identical with this right, with this kind of justice. All right?
Reader:
which is the object we must strive for, Clinias; this equality is what we must aim at, now
that we are settling the State that is being planted. And whoever founds a State elsewhere
at any time must make this same object the aim of his legislation,—not the advantage of a
few tyrants, or of one, or of some form of democracy, but justice always; and this
consists in what we have just stated, namely, the natural equality given on each occasion
to things unequal. None the less, it is necessary for every State at times to employ even
this equality in a modified degree, if it is to avoid involving itself in intestine discord, in
one section or another,—for the reasonable and considerate, wherever employed, is an
infringement of the perfect and exact, as being contrary to strict justice— (757c-d)
LS: That is a crucial sentence. The equitable and forgiving would be a more literal
translation. In other words, the humane, what we would call humane, is an infringement
of the perfect and exact.
Reader:

227
for the same reason it is necessary to make use also of the equality of the lot, on account
of the discontent of the masses, and in doing so to pray, calling upon God and Good Luck
to guide for them the lot aright towards the highest justice. Thus it is that necessity
compels us to employ both forms of equality; but that form, which needs good luck, we
should employ as seldom as possible. (757e-758a)
LS: That confirms what I said before: the political is not quite rational and can never be.
A dilution of true justice is required. This dilution of true justice is due to necessity; it is a
concession to humanity, as we would call it today, but it is a concession. The
consequence is that the rank of the political will necessarily be lower. That is a quite
remarkable passage. And the technicality of this is simply the use of the lot, which gives
every citizen the same chance as everyone else. In that sense it is perfectly egalitarian,
whereas the other provisions are nonegalitarian. But we still have not received an answer
to this other question. The democratic element is represented by the lot. What about the
monarchic element? Why should [there be] this proportionate justice, which gives higher
honors to the better and less honors to the baser? That has nothing to do with monarchy
after all. Now let us turn to 761e.
Student: Could I ask a question? Does this mean then that somehow, that justice is a
thing, or a something or other which in its essence as a-human? In other words, it is not
essentially bound up with human beings, I mean, in its very nature. When bound up with
human beings it is then diluted.
LS: When I spoke of humanity, I meant humaneness. And humaneness is a certain virtue,
humanitas, a certain human virtue in certain human relations. Now according to one
definition of humanity, which I happen to know only from Thomas Aquinas but it may
very well go back to Cicero, humanity is a virtue which comes into play in a man’s
relations to his inferiors. Now here the point is this. It is simple to say of course that
justice is a human virtue pertaining to relations among humans. But justice in the highest
sense, in the strictest sense according to Plato would consist in giving to everyone what is
good for him—both goods and services, assigning goods and services. That would be a
perfectly rational society. This is not possible for a variety of reasons; therefore we have
to lower this demand. And therefore, for example, we say a just man is one who leaves
another in the possession of what belongs to him by law. Whether it is good for him to
possess it, whether he would not be better working hard than being a playboy, for
example, is of no concern to us as far as justice is concerned. But there is a problem here,
namely, the problem of the justice of the distribution of property. We disregard this
problem for a very good reason, but it is the disregard of something very important.
Therefore, we make a concession to the complex nature of man and of human relations.
That is the humanity, but it is also a concession. And we have to see that it is a
concession, otherwise we are in danger of saying that is wonderfully just in every respect,
yet it is not.
Student: The problem that was bothering me is that [in order] to be just, must not justice
in its essence take into account this very complexity?

228
LS: That you can do. And it is extremely sober to do so; hence Aristotle’s notion of
justice is the one which you suggest. Aristotle says: I do not care about those
considerations which go beyond the political-social; and accordingly he defines the
various virtues. But even in Aristotle one can recognize the difficulties. In former times it
was said that Aristotle was more civil, but not civil in the sense of politeness. He is
political in his thought—that means of course also more political in his thought. And
Plato faces the problem more clearly. Take the simple case of slavery, which Aristotle
justifies on certain grounds; and as Aristotle states these grounds they are unimpeachable.
But on the other hand, there is no way, no honest way of going over from slavery as
justified by Aristotle to the slavery actually existing, because only a tiny minority of men
are as such idiots, as the natural slave as defined by Aristotle must be. In other words,
these slaves, of whom Aristotle says that [they] are justly made slaves, are useless as
slaves except in very rare circumstances, e.g., if you have the time to stand by him all the
time telling him every move he is going to make. Only he is much stronger than you are,
but5 is not6 [capable of reason].
When Plato accepts slavery in this book, he makes it perfectly clear that it is a
concession. Therefore this awful statement in the fourth book about the various titles to
rule, in which slavery is in the center, has nothing whatever to do with considerations of
justice. A polis needs slaves; and then the only question is how to get them [in] the most
convenient way. If they come all from the same conquered tribe, that is bad, for very
expedient reasons: they know each other from home and this kind of thing. So you get
them from different tribes. Plato admits much more than Aristotle the element of truth in
what is called Machiavellianism—the element of truth in it. Aristotle knows it but he
thinks the less said about it the better. This is very good pedagogically speaking, and I
think he is to be commended for that, but since we are not only practitioners of the
political art—if we are—but are also theoretically interested, we need a bit more. The
same problem is present in Aristotle’s Ethics, that he never gives the reason why the
various virtues are good. He simply enumerates them and describes them, and that is a
masterpiece without any question. But Plato, in the Republic and also elsewhere—
although the general scheme is most visible in the Republic—tries to show why virtue is
good and why there are these and these and no other virtues. Aristotle takes the perfectly
sound position to say that for gentleman, decent men, the question “Why should I be
decent?” can never arise. In the moment you raise the question “Why should I be
decent?” you have already ceased to be decent. But on the other hand, it is undeniable
that it is a very legitimate theoretical problem to raise, but practically it mustn’t be raised.
Aristotle’s Ethics and Politics are eminently practical books, whereas the theoretical
problem comes in only at the fringe. Here and there in the Politics he says this question
arises here, which is of no practical importance, but here we might very well take it up.
So that I think is legitimate.
So I think that the practical judgment of Plato and Aristotle to any moral-political matter
of any consequence would not be different, but the reasoning is different. Aristotle tries
to preserve the self-subsistence of the moral–political to a much higher degree than Plato
does. Plato speaks of the moral–political problem, one could say, always with a view to
transcending that whole sphere. And therefore these artificial things—you know, when

229
he7 forces together temperance with prudence, and all this other artificiality which he
does with his eyes open—Aristotle doesn’t do that. Aristotle tries to keep within the
element of sobriety, of ordinary civic sobriety, as much as possible. And I think one
could say there has never been a man as sober as Aristotle. Think also of the famous story
of the eternity of the world. I mean [the story] that man was always generated by man and
the sun, as Aristotle puts it (the sun being needed for growth): that is a condition of
sobriety. In the moment we consider the possibility of man, of the human race having
come into being, and therefore of the first man either in the biblical sense or the sense in
which modern science teaches it, something absolutely outlandish, transcending all
possibility of sobriety enters. One could illustrate this in many ways. And Aristotle really
tries to make the world fit to live in for sober people. He does this with a consistency and
an energy which is always the subject, the legitimate subject of admiration. The only
trouble is that it doesn’t quite work. It doesn’t quite work, and therefore one has to8
[have] some help from this less sober and, to use his own terms, somewhat mad Plato.
That is one meaning of the Platonic praise of madness, that the sphere in which sobriety
is possible is surrounded by one which can no longer be understood in sober terms. You
know what I mean—commonsense terms.
Now to come back to our question: monarchy. Consider 761e5 to 6, page 427. Read this
section.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And if one either of the foreign neighbours or of the citizens injures another
citizen, be the culprit a slave or a freeman, the judges for the complainant shall be the
Five officers themselves in petty cases, and the Five each with their twelve subordinates
in more serious cases, where the damages claimed are up to three minae. No judge or
official should hold office without being subject to an audit, excepting only those who,
like kings, form a court of final appeal. (761e)
LS: Yes, that is it. Here is where the kings are explicitly mentioned. Do you recognize a
problem which as such has come to the fore in modern times and is not called in these
terms of Plato?
Student: Sovereignty.
LS: Yes. In other words, the problem of sovereignty, to use modern language, is that
which stands for the “monarchic element.” And in every society there is an element
which is not subject to appeal, just as you can appeal from one judge to another until you
arrive at some court from which no appeal is possible. And that applies not only to
judicial matters. I think that is the closest approximation to the statement of sovereignty
which I remember from classical literature. That is the monarchic element; everything is
subject to the state. At a certain point, even in a democracy of course, this element exists.
So there must be, apart from the element of persuasion, the element of something where
persuasion stops and no appeal is possible anymore. And that is the kingly element. That
is a remarkable passage.

230
In the sequel (762c) there is a passage to the effect that any citizen seeing this may punish
and beat a fellow citizen for something wrong.
Reader:
[Ath.]: If a man absents himself by day, or by sleeping away at night, without orders from
the officers or some urgent cause, and if the Five inform against him and post his name
up in the market-place as guilty of deserting his watch, then he shall suffer degradation
for being a traitor to his public duty, and whoever meets him and desires to punish him
may give him a beating with impunity. (762c-d)
LS: Does this remind any one of you of an actual institution somewhere in Plato’s time?
Student: Sparta.
LS: Sparta. In Xenophon’s Spartan Constitution it is mentioned. So there is also a certain
Spartan element9 that is here too. There are other remarks about that. For example, in
763b7, when he speaks of various officials, and says however one might call them—and I
I think Lamb translates “secret service men.” Now this was again the Spartan
designation. So he tries to make some concessions to Spartan usage. A question which I
can’t solve, and I don’t know whether anyone can solve, perhaps due to lack of
information, would be whether there are any Cretan institutions adopted. Athenian,
massively; some Spartan, quite clearly. And it would be a great joke if there were in the
Laws not a single Cretan institution. I am sorry that I cannot answer that question. I
regard it as perfectly possible that this is what happened. But we still have to answer this
question: Why should the rich be treated so gently by Plato? Plato knew very well that
this is a gross solution. We get an answer in 763d to e.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Thus it is needful that these men also should have both the ability and the leisure
to attend to public affairs. Therefore for the office of city-steward every citizen shall
nominate whatever person he chooses from the highest property-class; and when these
have been voted on, and they have arrived at the six men for whom most votes have been
cast, then those whose duty it is shall select the three by lot; and after passing the
scrutiny, these men shall execute the office according to the laws ordained for them.
(763d-e)
LS: Now what is the answer? It is not so paradoxical. Why is there a greater privilege
given to the rich than to the poor?
Student: Leisure.
LS: Leisure, time.
Student: But he also says ability.
DifferentStudent: Well, by having leisure they have the time to acquire—

231

LS: The chances of cultivation are greater. You see, if you take people who are not
propertied, they simply won’t have the time. They would be concerned with the farm, or
whatever it is, and10 [would] not have the possibility.
Student: Doesn’t Aristotle take up the problem that perhaps public officers could be
paid, and then the state could be nonoligarchic? And then the poor people could
participate and there would be no necessity to depend on leisured classes.
LS: To some extent. I do not remember now a definite Aristotelian passage where he
says so. You mean that they should be paid for their services?
Student: That in a state where you don’t pay the officers, the state becomes oligarchic
because the poor people can’t be officers, and thus the rich people become the officers.
LS: But what offices was he speaking of? The office of being a member of the assembly
and of juries? These were paid in Athens, and that law made possible the Athenian
democracy.
Student: But I wonder why Plato wouldn’t raise this problem of paying the poor people,
paying the officers money.
LS: But then public office would become a means for livelihood also. That is something
incompatible with the dignity of public office. That must not be an economic objective. I
think that would have been the point raised. And if we accept for one moment this
principle—that for public office proper there will be no payment, because there is a
certain impropriety in that—then, of course, all the other things follow.
There is another point which I think is of some interest in 765b, when he speaks of the
men in charge of choruses. Read just from 765, beginning.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The officer and manager of the choirs they must appoint in the following way. iii
All those who are devoted to these subjects shall attend the assembly, and if they refuse
to attend they shall be liable to a fine—a matter which the Law-wardens shall decide: any
others who are unwilling to attend shall be subject to no compulsion. (765a)
LS: That is of course hard to enforce. In other words, those who like these choruses (how
can you find out whether they like them if they simply don’t11 go there?)—those who are
interested would probably go by themselves.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Every elector must make his nomination from the list of those who are experts: in
the scrutiny, affirmation and negation shall be confined to one point only—on the one
side, that the candidate is expert, on the other side, that he is not expert— (765a)
iii

In the Loeb: “in some such way as the following.”

232

LS: That is very remarkable. Does he mean to say in the case of these leaders of the
choruses that moral considerations do not play any role? Think of a man like
Aristophanes as a possible candidate for such a position. They would not be very
particular about the other qualification provided he has experience, he understands these
things. I mention this only as a question. Let us turn then to a passage a bit later (765e).
Reader:
[Ath.:] Both the candidate that is put first, and the elector who puts him first, must be
convinced that of the highest offices of State this is by far the most important.
LS: In other words, the man in charge of the education.
Reader:
For in the case of every creature—plant or animal, tame and wild alike—it is the first
shoot, if it sprouts out well, that is most effective in bringing to its proper development
the essential excellence of the creature in question. Man, as we affirm, is a tame creature;
none the less, while he is wont to become an animal most godlike and tame when he
happens to possess a happy nature combined with right education, if his training be
deficient or bad, he turns out the wildest of all earth’s creatures. (765e-766a)
LS: Does this remind you of something?
Student: The Politics.
LS: Whose Politics?
Student: Aristotle’s Politics.
LS: At the beginning; that is almost literally the same thing. And you see also “the virtue
of its own nature.” Every being has a nature of its own: man, human; dog, doggish, and
so on. And the virtue of that being is defined or pointed to by this given nature.
Student: Could I ask you about the problem of nature? It seems that they have a
conception of human nature, of a perfection of human nature. He is constantly talking
about this human nature being almost made by education or destroyed by poor education.
LS: Not the nature, but the goodness or badness depends decisively on education. Let us
leave it at this and add any footnote if necessary. But as to the nature, man cannot be
made into a stone or a horse. You can kill a man, but then he ceases to be a living being;
he never becomes a stone.
Student: I see this. The problem I was dealing with is not so much making man a stone
or something like this, but was that between the good man and the bad man: however this
state [is] arrived [at], there seems to be in Plato a difference that is almost in the order of
essence.

233

LS: No. Except one point. I see, however, what you mean. They make a distinction
between good natures and bad natures. Some men have a greater natural aptitude for
virtue and others have a very small one, by nature. That is axiomatic for Plato and for
Aristotle. But the question, of course, is that that is never enough. Both need training and
education, although to different degrees. And there may be people (we read an indication
of that last time, although I don’t remember the exact passage), although very few, who
are born without that inborn self-love which is the root of all evil according to Plato. You
remember that passage. Now in other words, what he has in mind is that there are certain
human beings who will simply by their nature become good men regardless of the
influences to which they are exposed. And I believe, as I mentioned last time, that
Socrates was in12 [his] opinion such a man. So there was surely some training needed but
this training, as it were, Socrates gave to himself. Take the famous story when a
physiognomist saw him and said: Socrates, you are by nature a criminal, because of the
certain physiognomic features. And Socrates said, as a modern classical scholar has
expressed it: Sir, you have seen through me. But, Socrates says, I did something about it.
He had it in himself to do something about it; he did not depend on education decisively.
That is, I think, what Plato means. But this doesn’t do away with the unity of the species;
even the most depraved fellow is still a human being. His very depravity is human
depravity.
Student: But politically it almost does away with this unity of the species.
LS: No. I would say it as follows. According to Plato as well as to Aristotle there is a
hierarchy of human beings according to nature, and not only that of grown-ups/children
or males/females, but also regarding the moral and especially the intellectual gifts. Every
polis tries to imitate the natural hierarchy because somehow it knows it needs the best
men at the top, and this kind of thing. But no social order can succeed fully in that, and
that is the problem of every social order. No one in his senses would find it wrong to be
subject to men who are morally and intellectually superior to him, but the people to
whom we are politically or socially inferior are not necessarily morally and intellectually
our superiors, and that creates a problem. Thus this strange thing of a man, say Socrates,
of a high moral and intellectual standard has to bow throughout his life to people who are
his inferiors. That is the polis, the problem of the polis. And anarchism is of course no
solution, because then you get a wholly inconsistent position. You are constantly deriving
benefit from something which you condemn. Then you have to be really consistent and
go to the woods in a place which is in no way subject to political authority. Some people
have tried to do that.
Student: If there is a nature of man which involves somehow reason as a part of that
nature, there is also the fact that some men are born with much less reason—
LS: Less intellectual gifts, yes.
Student: Would that, then, involve a failure of nature?

234
LS: Sure, that is what Aristotle says—that nature tries to do that—but then there is [a]
certain matter, and this creates difficulties. Just as the sculptor tries to make a statue, you
know, and sometimes the marble simply fails and then the statue will not come out as he
wanted it, the same is true of nature working in the formation of man. Empirically
speaking, there are idiots, imbeciles and morons. So there are, undeniably.
Student: My problem is, wouldn’t this hierarchy be unnatural in the sense of not being
due to nature proper, this inequality of natural gifts?
LS: I fail to understand that. This hierarchy is natural. Well, there is a form and matter, to
use this scheme that belongs to all natural beings including man. And therefore, that
matter makes a man so that it is extremely hard for him to devote any attention to any
thinking, that is so. And I think what Plato and Aristotle imply is this: that it is essentially
necessary that there be a hierarchy, meaning that there are more not quite at the bottom, I
mean of the moronic, of course not. But say what you understand by very normal and
very average: that is a broad line, and then as you go up, less and less. Empirically that is
the case. For example, if you think of painters: the very good painters are much less in
number than those who just paint. And the same is true in every profession. Why could it
not be that all mathematicians, for example, were mathematical geniuses? I mean, prior to
investigation, empirical and otherwise, why not? But in fact it is not so. And therefore,
since this is always so as long as we know, they would say there must be a reason for
that. Apparently that which—if we understand nature as a productive force for a moment,
nature has to13iv overcome to bring about the terrestrial intellectual being. The obstacles
are so considerable that the highest achievements must be rare. A certain average
intellectuality nature easily achieves, since there are so very few morons in the technical
sense. One must, after all, get an explanation for that fact.
Student: I may simply be confused about words, but still one can speak about nature
trying to make as many perfect men as possible.
LS: Yes.
Student: Therefore all the imperfect men are less natural than the few perfect men.
LS: No. You can only say the possibility of a full development of the perfection
essentially open to man is in fact open to a minority. That is so. That is an empirical fact.
And what the reason for that is requires metaphysical . . . v that women could not be
kings. Proof: Elizabeth, Catherine, and quite a few others. They are perhaps not models
of all virtues,vi surely that is possible. But the funny thing is this. For the vulgar mind, the
demand that women should be kings is of course most shocking in olden times, but it
isn’t shocking at all if you think a bit about it. The real paradoxes are the women
philosophers. And I suggested at that time that the students who didn’t believe me should
consult political history on the one hand, and the history of philosophy on the other. And
iv
v

In the transcript: “be overcome”; it is likely that Strauss said simply “overcome.”
There was a break in the tape at this point.

vi There is a short break at this point in the transcript.

235
they would see there are quite a few outstanding women in political history and there is
not a single one outstanding in the history of philosophy. And then someone said,
seriously: You forget Susan,vii and X said: Well, I have no reply to that. Well, the reply is
obvious, I believe. Well, I don’t know Susan, but surely that. She was a quite meritorious
woman in England, I believe. So that is, I believe, what Plato meant. That has something
to do with the intellectuality. The practical life, the life of politics, is not of that radical
intellectuality of the speculative, the philosophic life. I think that is what he has in mind.
And one has these famous prodigies, the daughter of Scaliger, a famous scholar of the
sixteenth century, who brought up his girls so they could write Latin poems when they
were three years old and so on. Fantastically learned creatures, and yet whom we
remember is old Scaliger, not his prodigy daughter. There is a problem here. And perhaps
nature does play a role. That would be one part of it.
Now in 768b, beginning, he makes the remark that the man who does not participate in
judicial things . . . How does he translate that?
Reader:
[Ath.]: In private suits also, so far as possible, all the citizens must have a share; for the
man that has no share in helping to judge imagines that he has no part or lot in the State at
all. (768b)
LS: That will remind you also of Aristotle’s definition of the citizen when he begins the
discussion. Participation in judicial as well as in legislative functions, Aristotle says. The
judicial function is also stated here very clearly. If a man does not even participate in
judicial functions he is not a citizen. That is the minimum one can imagine. Now in the
sequel, 769a to 770a, he discusses the problem of the future of the legislation and its
possible progress. This is a transition from the magistracies to the laws proper. And that
is a very important passage because the Athenian Stranger knows that this fixity of the
laws, praised in the first book when he spoke of Egypt, for example, is not something
which can reasonably be expected. One must expect future change and, in the most
desirable case of course, future progress. We cannot read this now.
Then afterwards he turns to the beginning of legislation. And here [lies] the difficulty to
which today’s report referred. What is the difficulty? What is the beginning of
legislation?
Student: Divinity and number instead of knowledge.
LS: Yes, the temples and knowledge. He had said at least twice that the beginning of
legislation must be knowledge, and now he makes temples the beginning of legislation.
But the contradiction is resolved in 771d.
Reader:
vii

Susanne K. Langer, whose works include Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Symbolism
of Reason, Rite, and Art (1942) and Feeling and Form: A Theory of Art (1953).

236
[Ath.]: For the present, then, we shall trust to the oracular statement just delivered, and
we shall employ these subdivisions, and give to each portion the name of a God, or of a
child of Gods, and bestow on it altars and all that belongs thereto; and at these we shall
appoint two assemblies every month for sacrifice—of which twelve (yearly) shall be for
the whole tribal division, and twelve for its urban section only; the object of these shall
be, first, to offer thanksgiving to the gods and to do them service, and secondly, as we
should assert, to promote fellowship amonst ourselves and mutual acquaintance and
association of every sort. For, in view of the fellowship and intercourse of marriage, it is
necessary to eliminate ignorance, both on the part of the husband concerning the woman
he marries and the family she comes from, and on the part of the father concerning the
man to whom he gives his daughter; for it is all-important in such matters to avoid; if
possible, any mistake. (771d)
LS: And so on. Now you see there is a connection. In a way, these festivals in the
temples subserve the right marriage regulations. Now what is the difficulty? That is a
somewhat funny thing to which he refers in the sequel, but by no means unserious and
unimportant, and that is this: the future spouses should know one another to some extent.
It is of course of the utmost importance to have some awareness of their bodies, and that
is excluded by good manners. A certain nakedness—Plato tries to come as close as
possible to the possibility of the future spouses seeing one another naked. And as a
counterpoise against this daring proposal he gives it this religious background. So the
question of marriage is certainly the primary subject of the legislation here.
He goes then into the more detailed marriage prescriptions. We cannot go into all of
them. Let us read only one point which is of broader importance for Plato’s whole
thought. Let us read 773a.
Reader:
[Ath.:] You are right. So let us say to the son of noble sires: My child, you must make a
marriage that will commend itself to men of sense, who would counsel you neither to
shun connexion with a poor family, nor to pursue ardently connexion with a rich one, but,
other things being equal, to prefer always an alliance with a family of moderate means.
Such a course will benefit both the State and the united families, since in respect of
excellence what is evently balanced and symmetrical is infinitely superior to what is
untempered. The man who knows he is unduly hasty and violent in all his actions should
win a bride sprung from steady parents; while the man that is of a contrary nature should
proceed to mate himself with one of the opposite kind. Regarding marriage as a whole
there shall be one general rule— (773a-b)
LS: Let us stop here. He doesn’t call it “general rule”; he says “one myth.” Very
advisedly, as he makes clear in the sequel, that cannot be a law. And “myth” is also used
in contradistinction to law. Myth, from the word mythos in Greek is derived paramythia,
which means something like admonition. So in other words, the admonitory part of this
code can be called myth as distinguished from law. This knowledge of the moderate and
the daring, that is the key moral distinction among men: some are hot and some are cold,
some are daring and some are cautious, and this line is of crucial importance. We have

237
seen some examples when we discussed Plato’s own dialogues in which he tries to bring
about a marriage, an intellectual marriage, of the two different types, for example, [of]
Glaucon [and] Adeimantus in the Republic, the idea being that the perfect man would
possess both qualities in a proportional manner. But in most cases, in the case of most
men, they are split.
Student: Is there any significance in the fact that he describes the man as himself unduly
hasty and the bride as being sprung from moderate parents?
LS: No, no. That might be because the general view, as you know—and I suppose this is
based on some truth—is that the daring befits more the males and the restraint and
reserve more the females.
Student: But I was referring to the point that he describes the man’s qualities and then
the qualities of the parents of the bride, not the qualities of the bride.
LS: I do not believe that this means anything more than that there is a general
presumption that the offspring will correspond to the parents, and since the parents are
much better known, having lived so much longer, you will look at them in order to have
your expectation. But let us read the immediate sequel of that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] each man must seek to form such a marriage as shall benefit the State, rather than
such as best pleases himself. There is a natural tendency for everyone to make for the
mate that most resembles himself, whence it results that the whole State becomes illbalanced both in wealth and in moral habits— (773b)
LS: In other words, this marriage which Plato presupposes now on the level of empirical
marriages—daring men/reserved women, or vice versa—is in a way against nature. That
is a convention, [an] imposition because, he says, in a way everyone seeks by nature what
is most similar to him. Now there are some other marriage proposals which are quite
interesting. For example, 776a to b (page 471).
Reader:
[Ath.]: The man who marries must part from his father and mother, and take one of the
two houses in his allotment, to be, as it were, the nest and home of his chicks, and make
therein his marriage and the dwelling and home of himself and his children. For in
friendships the presence of some degree of longing seems to cement various dispositions
and bind them together; but unabated proximity, since it lacks the longing due to an
interval, causes friends to fall away from one another owing to an excessive surfeit of
each other’s company. Therefore the married pair must leave their own houses to their
parents and the bride’s relations, and act themselves as if they had gone off to a colony,
visiting and being visited in their home, begetting and rearing children, and so handing on
life, like a torch, from one generation to another, and ever worshipping the gods as the
laws direct. (776b)

238
LS: What is the difficulty here? Someone of you laughed about this description of the
problem.
Student: The problem of the in-laws.
LS: Yes, to put it simply. But the reason explicitly given is of course not quite the same.
He doesn’t say anything of these well-known facts, of frictions between the parents of
one spouse and the other spouse.
Student: It must be noted that the question of proximity raises certain problems.
LS: Is it not true that one can get sick and tired of another human being?
Student: What about the wife and the husband?
LS: That is exactly it. I think that is what he means. The real rationale for this institution
would be something else. For if you apply the rationale given here, that would of course
be an argument against permanent marriage. This is Plato’s way of indicating a delicate
problem.
Student: There is something I noticed about this. If the happy couple are moving out to
their allotment, presumably given them by the state—
LS: No, no. Every lot consists of two parts, one near the town and one in the countryside.
And they are spending the honeymoon and the rest of their lives in that out-farm until
they inherit. That is the idea. No new lots.
Student: This is still the family’s lot?
LS: Yes. Yes, sure. Well, it may come also from the bride’s side. That depends on the
situation. If she is the only child, for example, she would get that. The difficulty would be
if he is also the only son, you know; then we get already into complex problems of how
to preserve the original division.
Student: I think in book 5 he made provisions for that, possibly giving a son to the
family, and so on.
LS: But that leads to great difficulties. There can be all kinds of favoritism, so that is a
very delicate problem. It won’t do to say that everyone should have two children because
some may die. It is not a practically soluble problem.
Student: Could I ask you the rationale for this control over a family? It seems to me it
can be justified from the other point of view. Now marriages are made because these
groups of citizens are immensely important. But how about the consideration of the
privacy of the family? How does Plato, or didn’t he see . . .

239
LS: No, that remains. Some privacy of course remains, but severely limited by these
common meals of which he will speak later. But there is infinitely more privacy than in
the Republic.
Student: But the thing is that the objection could be raised that this is unnatural, that the
chief rule of marriage, even if it is a miserable marriage, is to look to the state, to the
polis.
LS: Yes, surely. Plato admits this, that it is in a way unnatural. But the answer would be
this—Plato’s answer, and I believe also Aristotle’s: there is only one human activity
which is higher in dignity than living for the polis, dedicating one’s self to the polis, and
that is the speculative. All other human activities are lower in rank than dedication to the
polis. And therefore, that someone—say, the domestic life, you know—he marries as he
likes, that is in principle subject to political regulation. I mean,14 [it is] a matter of
expediency whether such regulations should be made and how strict and detailed. Today,
I believe, it is a general rule that people choose one another on the basis of complete
absence of experience, naturally. Sometimes they may listen to experienced people and
sometimes they don’t. In former times the rule was much more that the initiative was the
parents’ because they know much better. And of course this chapter has not been closed,
which solution is right. Now once you accept for one moment that the personal
preferences, as they call it, is a secondary consideration compared with the function of
married life itself, the duration, the bringing up of children, and these duties, then the
question may very well arise whether the parents are necessarily the best judges; and
whether, if such a thing is possible, not what they now call marriage counselors but really
the most respected and older members of the community should not have at least
informally, if not legally, the right to advise potential brides and bridegrooms as to the
wisdom of the marriage. It boils down to this.
Student: I was thinking more along these lines, to put it in terms Plato would recognize.
Is it assumed then that the requirements of the species could never be in conflict with the
regulations of marriage proposed here?
LS: But what . . .
Student: Because presumably the requirements of the species is the first rule over
marriage, and that somehow the political considerations are secondary.
LS: Yes, but on the other hand, since man is by his nature subject to, let me say, certain
rules of virtue, that is as important. It is as important whether the marriage is likely to be
virtuous and to lead to the generation of virtuous children [rather] than the mere
production of another human infant. That is the problem. I know much too little of
biology to answer certain questions which arise here. For example, whether, as Plato
states it here when he speaks against drunkenness, etc.—folklore in Europe says a lot of
things about these matters, but whether they are really so important, I don’t know. At any
rate, Plato seems to have adopted this; whether for pedagogical reasons or because he
believed in it, I don’t know. At any rate, Plato thought it depends very much on the right

240
selection and that sentiment is the least reliable guide in these matters, contrary to the
modern view. And the other, the political problem, makes immediate sense. If the rich
marry only with the rich, after a very short while you will have a circle of rich families
with no deeper bonds with the rest of the population, whereas if, apart from the
community of wealth, there are also cross-connections with the poorer people, the whole
society is of course healthier. Think of what goes on in bloody civil strife if there are such
connections. The desires to kill decrease considerably.
But this question of the marriage, not so much of the rich and the poor as that of the
temperate and daring, is a great theme of Plato. It goes much beyond the political
discussions of Plato. According to Plato’s analysis, man on the highest level is
characterized by the proper mixture of both. Both courage and restraint are integral parts
of the efforts of the human mind. That is the highest problem, to which this other thing
points.
Now in the immediate sequel, 776b, following, he speaks of the treatment of slaves. And
here in this connection Megillus spontaneously enters the discussion. Can you state again
why he is so much interested?
Student: This is a Spartan institution: the Helots that are being called into question.
LS: Yes, that didn’t work in Sparta. And you remember we had an allusion to that in the
third book when he spoke of the breakdown of the original Peloponnesian order, and
something happened which was a breech of fraternity, you see, but it was mentioned,
spoken of, only with the greatest delicacy. That was this: that the Spartans subjugated
their kindred, the Messenians, and made them a kind of slaves.viii And Sparta had to
suffer a lot from that throughout their history. I think it is quite remarkable here that there
is no longer any restraint of the criticism of Sparta anymore. The whole question has
disappeared. You remember that was so important at the beginning: How he could dare to
criticize these venerable codes? We are completely beyond that stage here. And there is
of course no longer any question of divine origin of these laws. There was a very specific
passage, which I do not find at the moment, but perhaps we [will] find it a bit later.
I would only say this. This combination—first we have marriage, and then we have
slave—a great imitator of Plato made use of that. I mean Sir Thomas More, in his Utopia.
There is one chapter entitled “Of Bondmen, Sick Persons, Wedlock and Diverse Other
Matters.” He was a very busy man, you know.
Now in 777d there is also an interesting passage to which we might look. I must mention
there are many things we have to skip.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Two means only are left for us to try—the one is, not to allow the slaves, if they
are to tolerate slavery quietly, to be all of the same nation, but so far as possible, to have
them of different races,—and the other is to accord them proper treatment, and that not
viii

See, e.g., Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, book 1.

241
only for their sakes, but still more for the sake of ourselves. Proper treatment of servants
consists in using no violence toward them—
LS: Violence is not the proper word; hybrizein: not to be insolent or arrogant to them.
Reader: and in hurting them even less, if possible than our own equals. For it is his way
of dealing with men who it is easy for him to wrong that shows most clearly whether a
man is genuine or hypocritical in his reverence for justice and hatred of injustice.
LS: That is a simple verity but a very important verity.
Reader:
He, therefore, that in dealing with slaves proves himself, in his character and action,
undefiled by what is unholy or unjust will best be able to sow a crop of goodness,—and
this we may say, and justly, say, of every master, or king—
LS: “Tyrant” is the Greek word.
Reader:
and of everyone who possesses any kind of absolute power over a person weaker than
himself. We ought to punish slaves justly, and not to make them conceited by merely
admonishing them as we would free men. An address to a servant should be mostly a
simple command: there should be no jesting with servants, either male or female, for by a
course of excessively foolish indulgence in their treatment of their slaves, masters often
make life harder both for themselves, as rulers, and for their slaves, as subject to rule.
(777d-778a)
LS: I think that is a remarkable piece of old-fashioned morality, you know, which accepts
these inequalities and yet is decent on this basis. But you see also the slight comical
implication when he speaks [of how] one should not make jokes with them and he
mentions the females first, because the danger of joking, especially for a younger master,
is probably greater. We take another passage which is very important for understanding
this, 780, beginning.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Whoever proposes to publish laws for States, regulating the conduct of the
citizens in State affairs and public matters, and deems that there is no need to make laws
for their private conduct, even in necessary matters, but that everyone should be allowed
to spend his day just as he pleases, instead of its being compulsory for everything, public
and private, to be done by a regular rule, and suppose that, if he leaves private conduct
unregulated by law, the citizens will still consent to regulate their public and civil life by
law,—this man is wrong in his proposal. (780a)
LS: Again, does this remind you of a famous statement in classical literature, this notion
of the greatest possible liberty for the individuals in their private lives?

242
Student: Pericles.
LS: Yes, where?
Student: In Thucydides.
LS: The funeral speech. If we call this liberalism in a certain vague but not unimportant
meaning of liberalism, this problem was of course perfectly known to Plato. And he
rejects this, just as Aristotle does. But the proposition itself is as old as the hills, at least at
this time. Now the connection in which Plato makes this remark is the great innovation he
suggests here, namely, common meals for women. Common meals for men were a
common practice in Sparta and Crete, but now common meals for women. This is a great
innovation and an additional interference with private life. Women, too, have to take their
meals in common. Who established the common meals for men? Do you remember?
Who did it?
Student: In Sparta, Lycurgus.
LS: And in Crete? The Cretan code is older than the Spartan.
Student: That would be Minos.
LS: Now let us see 780b.
Reader:
[Ath.:] For what reason have I said this? For this reason,—because we shall assert that
the married people must take their meals at the public messes neither more nor less than
they did during the time preceding marriage. When the customs of the public mess first
arose in your countries—probably dictated by a war or by some event of equal potency,
when you were short of men and in dire straits,—it seemed an astonishing institution; but
after you had had experience of these public messes and had been obliged to adopt them,
the custom seemed to contribute admirably towards security; and in some such way as
that the public mess came to be one of your established institutions. (780b-c)
LS: So who established the common meals for men?
Student: I suppose chance, in that case.
LS: There is not a word about this Minos. Yes, it was just imposed on them. And let us
now read the next speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So, though this was once, as I said, an astonishing and alarming institution to
impose on people, a man who tried to impose it as a law nowadays would not find it an
equally difficult task. But the practice which follows on this institution, and which, if
carried out, would be really successful,—although at present it nowhere is carried out,

243
and so causes the lawgiver (if he tries) to be practically carding his wool (as the proverb
has it) into the fire, and labouring in vain at an endless tale of toils,—this practice is
neither easy to state nor, when stated, to carry into effect.
[Clin.:] Why do you show so much hesitation, Stranger, in mentioning this?
[Ath.:] Listen now, so that we may not spend much time on the matter to no purpose.
Everything that takes place in the State, if it participates in order and law, confers all
kinds of blessings; but most things that are either without order or badly-ordered
counteract the effects of the well-ordered. And it is into this plight that the practice we
are discussing has fallen. In your case, Clinias and Megillus, public meals for men are, as
I said, rightly and admirably established by divine necessity— (780c-e)
LS: Out of some “divine necessity,” meaning of a necessity, war or whatever it was. Why
does he call it divine? Partly with a view to nonhuman–superhuman origin, partly also
with a view to its effect. It was a necessity bringing about a sensible institution. Again
nothing said of the divine legislators. Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] but for women this institution is left, quite wrongly, unprescribed by law, nor are
public meals for them brought to the light of day; instead of this, the female sex, that very
section of humanity which, owing to its frailty, is in other respects most secretive and
intriguing, is abandoned to its disorderly condition through the perverse compliance of
the lawgiver.
LS: Does this not seem extraordinary? I hope you have not forgotten the enormous
caution with which he attacked the legislator in the first books. Now without any
hesitation, without any excuse. Continue.
Reader:
Owing to your neglect of that sex, you have had an influx of many consequences which
would have been much better than they now are if they had been under legal control. For
it is not merely, as one might suppose, a matter affecting one-half of our whole task—this
matter of neglecting to regulate women,—but in as far as females are inferior in goodness
to males—
LS: Not in goodness. With a view to goodness. In other words, their chances of becoming
virtuous are smaller.
Reader:
just in so far it affects more than the half. (780e-781b)
LS: Now it is perfectly clear that all admiration for the Spartan–Cretan legislation has
gone, except in certain details, but it is studied like any other legislation and all its claims
to divine origin have gone. But accepting the common meals of men as a sound
institution, if only imposed by chance on the Cretans and Spartans, the Athenian Stranger
tries to enlarge it and also have common meals for women. And that means a complete
break with custom, a complete break with the ancestral, a complete break with the old.

244
The old question of the old, of the origin, comes up again. And here we have a passage in
781e to 782, the speech of the Athenian there.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Let us, then, revert again to our first statements.
LS: Literally translated “toward the first things.” Which means not only the first
statement but also the first things, as you will see from the sequel.
Reader:
Thus much at least every man ought to understand,—that either the human race never had
a beginning at all, and will never have an end, but always was and always will be, or else
it must have been in existence an incalculable length of time from the date when it first
began.
LS: You see, the whole question is opened again, but his time it is left open whether it is
only an unbelievably long time that man exists or whether he has existed at all times. Let
us continue from there.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well then, do we not suppose that all the world over and in all sorts of ways there
have been risings and fallings of States, and institutions of every variety of order and
disorder, and appetites for food—both meats and drinks—of every kind, and all sorts of
variations in the seasons, during which it is probable that the animals underwent
innumerable changes?
[Clin.:] Certainly.
[Ath.:] Are we to believe, then, that vines, not previously existing, appeared at a certain
stage; and olives, likewise, and the gifts of Demeter and Korê? And that some
Triptolemus was the minister of such fruits? And during the period that these fruits were
as yet non-existent, must we not suppose that the animals turned, as they do now, to
feeding on one another. (781e-782b)
LS: What light does this throw on the beginnings, on man’s beginnings?
Student: That man without the state is a beast rather than a god.
LS: Yes, but specifically regarding the good here.
Student: The he was a cannibal.
LS: Yes. That is very important. Don’t forget that in book 3 we were entertained with the
notion that in the beginning man was much better than he is now. Here the opposite is
stated. That is a very important passage. The beginning was extremely savage. So then [it
is] slightly concealed in the next speech, which we should also read.
Reader:

245
[Ath.:] The custom of men sacrificing one another is, in fact, one that survives even now
among many peoples— (782c)
LS: You see, “even now.” In other words, in the past that was predominant. And that is
now somewhat overlaid by the next remark, namely, that we also have the opposite
custom: strict vegetarianism. I would say that this reference to a primitive cannibalism,
which was of course indicated in the third book by the reference to Homer’s Cyclops—as
you may remember, namely, that the first polity was that described by Homer 15 [in his
account] of the Cyclops, who was a cannibal—comes up in the context here of the most
radical break with custom hitherto proposed. Naturally the drunkenness would have been
a much greater break, but we have seen that this drunkenness was a gross overstatement
and was not meant to be literally an institution. But this—the common meals—is the
greatest break with the common notions which we have seen hitherto. The explicit reason
which Plato gives in the sequel is of course something else, namely, what he calls the
three natural diseases of man: the desire for food, drink, and sexual gratification. How
can he call them diseases? What does that mean? Is it not absurd to call these natural
desires diseases?
Student: The footnote indicates that it is because some men are in a diseased state when
dominated by these desires.
LS: Yes, sure. In other words, a man is a sick man if this is not controlled by reason. And
he gives three remedies against them in this connection (783a). You stated them in your
paper.
Student: Fear, law and true reasoning—reinforced, though, by muses and the gods.
LS: But fear is of course something very different from law. And law is also something
very different from true reasoning, the true logos. You remember the discussion we had
in reading the first and second books (645b in the first book) when he makes a distinction
between the individual and the polis. The individual may take the true logos, the result of
sound reasoning, and make it his rule. And 16 the polis, he says,17 must take a logos—not
the true logos—from a god or from a human legislator. That is the point, and that is the
whole problem with which this book is concerned: that the law derives its claim to
respectability from its alleged rationality, reasonableness. But this reasonableness it does
not possess, strictly speaking. And that is the whole problem, that man must bow to an
order which would deserve full respect only if fully rational but which it can never be.
We ourselves need quite an effort to understand this Platonic problem, and the main
reason I believe is this. In modern times the attempt has been made to build up a perfectly
rational society—that was the dream of original liberalism, for example, but it is even
older than liberalism, e.g., even in the absolute monarchy, the enlightened despotism, and
this kind of thing. And in our time it lives on in a diluted and modified form in Marxism.
In liberal democracy it has undergone so many modifications that it is barely
recognizable, but it still haunts us. Now of course the rational society in [the] modern
sense is rational in an entirely different way than what Plato and Aristotle meant to be a

246
rational society. For example, the whole notion of egalitarianism characteristic of the
modern notion of a rational society is wholly alien to Plato and Aristotle, and [it] would
be regarded by them as irrational to treat unequal beings as equal. And also the rationality
is linked up in modern times very much with the bodily desires and the satisfaction of the
bodily desires, so much so that the truly rational society would be one which as such is in
no way concerned with virtue but at most with certain conditions of virtue. But even that
would not be correct, because it is strictly speaking concerned with the conditions of the
pursuit of happiness of each, regardless of how the individual understands happiness.
That is the meaning of life, liberty, property in Locke and such writers. Now the
characteristic thesis of Plato and Aristotle, I think one can say, is the denial of the
possibility of a rational society in their sense. They would have regarded the modern
notion of a rational society as wrong, namely, as the notion of an irrational society. They
would not have accepted that. But even the rational society as they saw it was in their
view not possible, and that is the root of all the difficulties. And therefore the polis, while
a perennial necessity and in this sense natural to men, is also a perennial problem: the
solution of the human problem cannot be found on its basis.
The last point which I would like to mention (783d) is the passage about how the bride
and bridegroom have to conduct themselves in the period of begetting children. That is a
nice example of a prelude in the Platonic sense—you know, something which cannot be
made a hard and fast law, [a] legal rule with punishments attached to it, but which
concerns the rules of respectability in a society. And it is of course as important [as], and
in a way more important than, laws in the technical sense of the term.
I believe these were the most important passages in the sixth book—most important at a
first glance, of course. There may be some very important passages which would not
come to sight without a much more precise reading than we can do now. Now is there
any question or objection? Well, then, let us adjourn.

1

Deleted “that.”
Deleted “all.”
3
Deleted “light arms.”
4
Deleted “in”
5
Deleted “it.”
6
Deleted “inaudible.”
7
Deleted “says.”
8
Deleted “be.”
9
Deleted “here.”
10
Deleted “do.”
11
Changed from “whether he likes it if he simply doesn’t.”
12
Deleted “this.”
13
Deleted “be.”
14
Deleted “as.”
15
Deleted “and the description.”
16
Deleted “of.”
17
Deleted “it.”
2

247
Session 10: February 17, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —because I had expected a more interesting paper from you.i
You didn’t bring out the gems of the seventh book at all. You gave a reliable and truthful
report of the content, but I believe you could have made it a bit more interesting. And I
was especially curious to hear from you because I believe you are the only one in this
class, at least among those registered, who got this training in Greek mathematics at St.
John’s which one doesn’t get anywhere else. And since Plato speaks here about a big
discovery in mathematics—you know this very long discussion, and particularly in such a
context—of solid geometry and also this discovery of the irrational numbers: perhaps you
can say something about this later. I also was surprised because I know you know that,
that this hunting subject as a concluding subject has some implications as the end of the
discussion of education. I believe we have even had some occasional private
conversations about it. Do you remember?
Student: You mean a substitution brought out in the dialectic?
LS: Yes, why didn’t you say that? After all, it is of some importance. Can you spell it out
for the benefit of some others?
Student: Well, I am not certain that I understand it, because it is a veiled reference.
LS: Lay a foundation for it, a simple foundation.
Student: Well, in the Republic the higher education consists in the study of arithmetic,
geometry and various mathematical sciences for the sake of leading to a study of things
that are. And this higher study is dialectic.
LS: Yes, which is a Platonic word for philosophy. Yes, but I said you should lay a
foundation, by which I meant this: as a book, the Laws is almost explicitly described as a
second-best version of the Republic. Therefore one must compare throughout the
provisions of the Laws with the provisions of the Republic, in those cases where there is
any common thing. Now clearly education is a big theme in the Republic. Books 6 and 7
are devoted to education, and here we have only book 7. Again, it may be a coincidence,
although it may not be. At any rate, in the Republic the whole thing culminates in
dialectics. The end. And here the end is hunting. This shows in the first place that the
most important thing is forgotten, deliberately forgotten, for this second-best purpose.
But there is also something else to add. It is not simply forgotten but we are also
reminded of it, and not merely by the place but also by the subject. Hunting is a common
Platonic metaphor for intellectual hunting, and that is in the highest case philosophy.
Student: You mean to say that the absence is indicated?
i

Strauss responds to a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.

248
LS: That alone is, I think, of tremendous importance. The silence or the almost complete
silence about philosophy in the Laws comes out most clearly in this educational chapter,
where dialectics is replaced by hunting. And the very name hunting reminds of dialectics,
given the Platonic usage.
I also thought it was very good what you said toward the end regarding the emphasis on
piety and fighting. That is perfectly true. But I believe that could have been substantiated
and thus made more important and more interesting. But one thing, I believe, is surely
wrong. You said in a certain context “human sacrifices,” or did I completely
misunderstand you?
Student: That is what I said.
LS: But that is impossible. There are no human sacrifices.
Student: Well, the reference to the son or brother who would grieve at the sight of that.
What else could that mean?
LS: No. Who would behave disrespectfully on the occasion—you know, where everyone
is solemn and proper, and then perhaps some members of the family are not sufficiently
pious and perhaps make jokes and so on. You know that happens in all religions, that
there are sometimes people who make jokes on solemn occasions. Why he chooses a
brother and son is of course an interesting question. I take it that the father can be
presumed to behave properly by virtue of his fatherly position. And the women, I believe,
are excluded because they simply have to behave. So what else remains except a brother
and a son? That is probably the explanation. Certainly there is no question of human
sacrifice; that is absolutely impossible.
But a more important question. You didn’t explain clearly why there cannot be legal
regulations of everything, i.e., why you have to leave it in very important matters at mere
advice or praise, and not law. You must think of this practical problem in practical terms.
Why is this really not possible? Take an example which would make it clear. How would
it work out? Why can one really not regulate everything by law? After all, an attempt has
been made in such old codes as the Jewish code. The Jewish tradition has really tried to
regulate everything by law, the most minute things of man. But why is it not possible
from Plato’s point of view? I suppose every old code does not make the clear distinction
between law and morals.
Student: Isn’t a powerful desire difficult to regulate by law?
LS: Sure, but one can hit it over the head. Some people have the great urge to kill other
people, perhaps because they are lonesome and so on. You must have heard of these, and
they may go scot-free today because they have been lonesome. So desires exist
everywhere and they are punished, people are punished for acting on these desires. That
is easy. Or do you mean the mere desires? For example, if the law commands that people
should mourn for their parents, what is the difficulty here? In one respect it is extremely

249
easy to prescribe that you have to wear, say, black robes or a black tie for twelve months
of the year. And anyone who deviates from that can get, if the lawgiver so desires, two
years’ hard labor for having worn a bright tie during the period of mourning. That is easy.
But what is not easy, and what is even impossible?
Student: Plato is trying to engender virtue in the citizens, and virtue requires a habit, and
also a right attitude of mind.
LS: But that is too general. Habits are acquired by action, and the legislator can prescribe
action.
Student: Is it implied in some way that the letter killeth the spirit?
LS: That is also too general. In the case of this fellow, the lawgiver cannot really enforce
sadness. He can enforce expressions of sadness, but that is of course not what the
legislator means when he says they should mourn their parents. But let us take another
example, because there are various aspects of it. The lawgiver wants that the mistress of
the house should [be the first to] get up 1 in the morning, before the males get up. Sure,
that is possible; you could have someone going around every day and seeing. Why not?
But still, how would it work in practice? Who would bring it to the attention of the
authorities if she would not do it? Surely not she herself, nor the slaves, who have not the
slightest interest in ending this agreeable situation that they get up at ten and the mistress
at twelve. In other words, some things are not enforceable for this practical reason,
because there would be no one to supervise that. And a real analysis would require (and
this would be a very interesting study) some knowledge of which things Plato says in the
Laws2 cannot be made the subject of legislation proper, and for what reasons, because
these are two different things, if you take the case of the feeling of sadness and the case
of the mistress getting up earlier in the morning. There may be other classes for all I
know. It would be worthwhile thinking about it.
Student: I was just going to suggest that this would be so for two reasons. First, the
impossibility, literal impossibility of regulating everything—both substantively and from
the point of view of enforcement, as you point out; and the other thing, that somehow he
intimates that some subjects are worthy of law.
LS: Yes, one may take the old Roman saying to the effect that the praetor doesn’t care
for trivial things. Surely, but you cannot say that of such important matters as education,
where he says all the time that everything depends especially on the first five years. And
then you cannot say that these are trivial things. You must look into that. There is also
something like the dignity of the legislator. You see, you have something like this here.
Education, moral education, is very important, and therefore only the most respected
members of the community must be in charge of that. You remember that. Now there are
certain things which are beneath the dignity of these people. You know, a certain kind of
spying around is really ignoble. And although the matter is important, the way in which it
could be taken care of is undignified. That is another reason. You know, to walk around
and perhaps try to get information from slave girls: What did they do? What did they say

250
to their children at the table? and so on—these things are wholly improper. This is
another class of cases. I think a thorough analysis would be very helpful. It would be
really helpful for a philosophy of law altogether; to take the Platonic view as to the limits
of legislation as against other views of these same limits would really be helpful.
But let us now turn to a coherent discussion of our section. We may begin with 790c3,
page 11, where he speaks again of myths. Myth is here again to be understood in
contradistinction to law, law proper, i.e., written with clear rules regarding enforcement,
etc. Now this distinction, I would say, follows necessarily if the law is the true logos, the
true speech about a certain subject. Then what cannot be expressed in the form of a law
cannot be a true speech and must be a myth. Now that is of course an ironical argument,
but in a way it has also to be considered. But still, that these laws regarding education are
particularly called myths has something to do with the broader theme which will come to
sight in the sequel. Let us read first the next speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Let us take this, then, as a fundamental assumption in both cases,—that for both
body and soul of the very young a process of nursing and moving, that is as continuous as
possible both by day and by night, is in all cases salutary, and especially in the case of the
youngest: it is like having them always rocked—if that were possible—on the sea.
(790c-d)
LS: Well, you see here, incidentally, the impossibility of getting a sufficient number of
supervisors and enforcement agents for something going on in every house, say twentyfour hours a day. That is another problem, or class. Continue.
Reader:
As it is, with new-born infants one should reproduce this condition as nearly as possible.
Further evidence of this may be seen in the fact that this course is adopted and its
usefulness recognized both by those who nurse small children and by those who
administer remedies in cases of Corybantism. Thus when mothers have children suffering
from sleeplessness and want to lull them to rest, the treatment they apply is to give them,
not quiet, but motion—
LS: That is beautiful, isn’t it? This trivial and well-known fact, and yet in what detail and
articulateness Plato spells it out for you. Do not keep them quiet but move them. How
strange, how paradoxical. Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] and instead of silence, they use a kind of crooning noise; and thus they literally
cast a spell upon the children (like the victims of a Bacchic frenzy) by employing the
combined movements of dance and song as a remedy.
[Clin.]: And what, Stranger, are we to suppose is the main cause of this?
[Ath.]: It is easy enough to see.
[Clin.]: How so? (790d-e)

251
LS: You see, it is a very rare case, I believe, that Clinias asks explicitly for a cause. He
has seen it all the time happening, and then when the Stranger has brought out the
paradox of it, Clinias says, yes, well, how come? Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Both these affections are forms of fright; and frights are due to a poor condition of
soul. So whenever one applies an external shaking to affections of this kind, the external
motion thus applied overpowers the internal motion of fear and frenzy, and by thus
overpowering it, it brings about a manifest calm in the soul and a cessation of the
grievous palpitation of the heart which had existed in each case. Thus it produces very
satisfactory results. The children it puts to sleep; the Bacchants, who are awake, it brings
into a sound state of mind instead of a frenzied condition, by means of dancing and
playing, with the help of whatsoever gods they chance to be worshipping with sacrifice.
This is—to put it shortly—quite a plausible account of the matter. (790e-791b)
LS: Yes, and Clinias is satisfied. This is of a very great importance for the sequel,
because he deals here now with the origin of the dance and all this kind of thing of which
he had spoken already in the second book. Now he gives a somewhat deeper reason for
that. The need for a dance is motion and sound combined. They can also be separated.
You can have an art which deals only with motion—mere mimicking, and of course the
other musical arts would be higher levels of that. Now what is the basic element in that?
From what does the need for sound and motion arise? What does it cure according to this
explanation?
Student: Fear.
LS: Fear. This would be the starting point. So in other words, this has a cathartic effect.
The motion and sound purge the fundamental fear, and there is a certain parallelism
indicated between the case of little children and those of a certain kind of religious
frenzy. That is the beginning of a long analysis which is later on referred to, used again,
but never fully developed. I suppose that a really thorough analysis of Aristotle’s famous
definition of tragedy would have to take into consideration the things said in the seventh
book of the Laws.
Then he turns somewhat later (794d to 795d) to the question of the education of girls, or
of women in general. But you had a question?
Student: Before you go on, I am a little bit puzzled by this curing of frights in small
children by rocking them. I don’t understand the analogy which is meant with the
religious group. What is the significance of that?
LS: Well, he seems to say that this is a parallel case.
Student: I don’t see that.
LS: Does he not imply that?

252

Student: I don’t see what sort of parallel he has in mind.
LS: The parallel between fear and frenzy.
Student: Frenzy is like fear?
LS: That is Plato’s explanation of it. The empirically observable fact is the frenzy. Well,
think of something else, you don’t have to think especially of Greek things. What about
these war dances common to many savages? What do they mean? They are meant to
bring about a state of courage, a state of disregarding all dangers. That is not true
courage, according to Plato. You have even an indication of that in a certain type of
military music. I am not familiar with American military music, but I know the kind
which was used in the German army that clearly had such an effect of making one forget
everything—in effect, a frenzy. It is much more civilized then the war dances, naturally,
but it is not completely alien to that.
Student: Well, that sounds quite reasonable.
LS: This is, I would say, an indication of the problem of the drama, and especially of the
tragedy altogether, which arose out of Dionysiac choruses. We will come to that later.
Student: . . . ii
LS: Ion, I see. He speaks here also in 791a3 of a manikēn kinesis—of a mad dash,
inspired motion—the Greek word for madness, which does not have the merely negative
sense. It has also the positive sense, so that Plato could say somewhere that madness has
brought greater blessings to Greece than sobriety. Divine madness, as it were, is also
implied in that. In other words, Plato goes here back to a very rudimentary phenomenon
in human life—every little child—in order to use this as a key to a very special
phenomenon, this particular kind of frenzy which is somehow at the root of tragedy. At
the root. You cannot understand tragedy completely from that, but you have to consider
that too.
Student: Is it only limited to tragedy or is it also at the root of one kind of religion?
LS: Yes, a certain kind of religion. We come to that later. But surely tragedy itself is
already no longer this basic fright. Tragedy has a relation to a certain kind of basic fright
which this moving of the cradle and the songs have for the basic fright of the children.
Just as this moving and singing is meant to overcome the fright, to purge it, in the same
way tragedy at its highest level serves the purpose of purifying and overcoming a
fundamental fear. That is part of the Aristotelian definition. You know, Aristotle says the
purification of fear and pity. That is the other part, the part which is not accounted for
here, but at least half of it comes in here. We must keep this in mind. You had a question?
ii

The transcriber notes: “A short interchange with a student in the rear of the room occurred here,
but the comments of the student could not be heard on the tape.”

253

Student: I don’t really want to pursue this now, but what is this about the poor condition
of the soul that is attributed to the infants?
LS: The poor condition of the soul is fear, the helpless fear.
Student: So it has no wider reference than to the fact that the child is afraid?
LS: Yes, but also grown-ups. And not merely cowards in the simple sense, but also these
people who are in the grip of these fears which are purged, and therewith transformed, by
choruses and ultimately by the drama. Well, in case someone doesn’t remember that or
hasn’t heard of it, that is no disgrace. Aristotle defines tragedy in which way? Does
someone remember it literally who has read it more recently?
Student: You mean that the end is to produce a catharsis of pity and fear, and so on.
LS: Yes, it is a very difficult definition because one first has to understand the connection
between fear and pity, which is not so easy. But assuming one has understood it, or
leaving the question open, then the question arises: Why is this purification involved and
why is this purification such a terribly important thing?
Student: To take the example advanced earlier of the savage war dances, it would seem
that the end or purpose of this is to bring about courage, but in the case of the tragedy we
are presented with terrible things and the problem is to induce fear.
LS: Surely, there must be a vicarious fear. You are not Hecuba, as someone said. It is a
vicarious fear, since it is not your business but rather you only observe it as a spectator.
But this vicarious fear is aroused by the tragic actions, but the tragic event is presented in
such a way as at the same time to enable the spectator to purge himself from that fear. So
at the end of the tragedy—from the good tragedy, as I understand Aristotle’s definition of
it—you come out of the theater in a state of poise, of sober poise, which is no longer in
the grip of fear nor of pity. But still you have undergone a modification.
Student: Aren’t you supposed to come out frightened?
LS: No. How do they call these things they do on the TV? Suspense. No, reconciliation is
the end. The whole thing is designed to lead us to a reconciliation, and that means also
the reconciliation of the spectator to the order of things. The reconciliation would not be a
reconciliation if there were not first a conflict: not only the conflict represented on the
stage but a conflict within the spectator himself. He must experience this conflict in order
to overcome it.
Student: But isn’t there such a thing as a proper fear?
LS: All right, but then you call the proper fear what Plato calls here reverence or aidōs as
the result of the tragedy. I have no objection to that, but that is a purified fear.

254

Student: Doesn’t one go into the theater with certain fears?
LS: No, not necessarily. Some people go to the theater—let us take a modern example—
after having had a good dinner, and thus are perfectly poised. And then they come in and
see a great tragedy, well enacted. And then the prehistory, the dinner and so on, is
forgotten, and they are suddenly confronted with a terrible conflict, say, of Hamlet or
Oedipus. And then something happens to them. And at the end, at least as Aristotle
understands it, they would have their primary naïve poise, the poise with which they
enter, destroyed; then there is a restoration of the poise on the basis of having become
aware, or having become aware again of this fundamental conflict which in this or that
form is present in all of us. As long as Hamlet is only a Prince of Denmark, who has his
particular problems with his mother and father, he doesn’t affect us. It must come to a
point where we recognize in ourselves, although we are not princes of Denmark, his
problem. The same applies to Oedipus or whoever you take. Let us replace this man who
has this excellent dinner and good wine by someone who is very poor—a student at the
University of Chicago—and bought a ticket at great sacrifice. He comes there and is not
poised at all; he may have all kinds of problems. But these little nuisances and
annoyances are of course also not the real thing, and they will also be replaced by an
awareness of the fundamental problem of man, and then again by a solution to that
problem, a human solution to that problem. The theater, just like the stage, is really a
little world by itself. I believe that they made it a rule in former times that you had to be
properly dressed when entering a theater. You could not go in as you walk around, and
[there were] these other things which they did in order to indicate that this is really an
spirit of solemnity, cut off from the everyday world.
Student: Just one more question. They are made sound by being out of their minds
presumably prior to their frenzy which is making them sound. There is a certain rational
calculation of what is fearful. There was a certain rational calculation of what was fearful.
And here the madness has overcome that fearfulness.
LS: That is not so clear. I am not so sure of that. Take the case of the baby. He surely has
no rational calculation of things terrible. And yet one can also say that this irrational
feeling is not groundless, because he is really completely helpless. Left to himself he
would be in instant danger of perishing. There may be something to that. But we must
continue.
Now the next point was women’s education in arms. And of course we know the general
idea from the Republic, and the arguments are quite good: that they can do something in a
battle only by making noise, so that the enemy believes that there is still a battalion
around. Thus they are not really capable of fighting, but they can do this other thing. This
reminds of certain passages in Aristotle’s Politics regarding Sparta. But this subject is
here linked up with an entirely different one, namely, with that of ambidexterity. And that
really is the beauty. Now what is common to both subjects, ambidexterity and having
women too in a military posture? That is a very great Platonic problem to which we have
alluded on an earlier occasion in this course: the production of wholeness. Here we have

255
the city consisting of two parts, the male and the female. And the one is completely left
out. Similarly, the two arms, or the two hands: only the right hand is cultivated; the left
hand is not. Let us have also here wholeness, the greatest possible wholeness everywhere.
That is here indicated by the taking together of these two different subjects. Plato
indicates here that we are in a state of limpingness: only one hand is cultivated and the
other is not, just as only the males are used for military purposes and not the females.
You remember in the first book, when he3 said the Spartans left courage limping by
limiting it only to the control of fears and not to the control of pleasures.
I believe you suggested in your report that Aristotle takes a different view of
ambidexterity. That is true, and it is especially interesting, but I can’t go into the long
question here. There is a single page in Aristotle where he speaks thematically in his own
name on natural right. Ambidexterity occurs as an example. By nature all men are righthanded, but that doesn’t exclude that by training men can become ambidextrous. And it is
a very difficult question what this means in the context. It would seem to mean that this is
a relation of natural right proper to the right kind of positive law, that it is a cultivation of
the natural right and therefore superior to natural right. That is one way of regarding
Aristotle’s teaching regarding natural right. But here let us read the beginning of this
passage, 794d.
Reader:
[Ath.:] You hear thatiii in the case of hands, right and left are by nature different in
respect of their utility for special acts; but, as a matter of fact, in the case of the feet and
the lower limbs there is plainly no difference in working capacity; and it is due to the
folly of nurses and mothers that we have all become limping, so to say, in our hands. For
in the natural ability the two limbs are almost equally balanced; but we ourselves by
habitually using them in a wrong way have made them different. (794d-e)
LS: Here in the Greek original, 794e2 to 3, he uses nature and habit as opposites. This is
not the only case of this kind in Plato, it occurs also in the Republic. Plato appeals to
nature: by nature the two hands are of equal capacity, but wrong habits have brought
about a bad state of affairs. An error regarding nature follows from that, namely, that we
attribute to nature what is in fact due only to habit. I mention this because there is still
this old myth going around that the opposition of nature and habit, of nature and
convention, is a thing limited to the so-called sophists. Plato makes the same use of it,
only Plato has a different understanding of nature; but the opposition itself is as common
in Plato as anywhere else and Plato wants to establish such habituation, such conventions
as are in accordance with nature. That remains always the principle.
In another passage, to which I can only refer now, 796b to c, you find a reference to the
goddess who clearly is Athena, the goddess of Athens in particular. And that is only one
example among many others of the fact that this is an attempt to Athenianize, if one can
use that expression, Crete—as would appear from the context. For our purposes it is more
urgent to turn to 797c and the speech of the Athenian there. It is quite a long speech.
iii

In the Loeb: “The view that, in the case of hands.”

256
Reader:
[Ath.]: I assert that there exists in every State a complete ignorance about children’s
games—how that they are of decisive importance for legislation, as determining whether
the laws enacted are to be permanent or not. For when the programme of games is
prescribed and secures that the same children always play the same games and delight in
the same toys in the same way—
LS: You see, the terms he uses here are the terms which are very common in Plato for
describing the ideas, which are always the same in every respect—the unchangeable.
ideas are the model for the customs here. Continue.
Reader:
and under the same conditions, it allows the real and serious laws also to remain
undisturbed; but when these games vary and suffer innovations, amongst other constant
alterations the children are always shifting their fancy from one game to another, so that
neither in respect of their own bodily gestures nor in respect of their equipment have they
any fixed and acknowledged standard of propriety and impropriety; but the man they
hold in special honour is he who is always innovating or introducing some novel device
in the matter of form or colour or something of the sort; whereas it would be perfectly
true to say that a State can have no worse pest than a man of that description, since he
privily alters the characters of the young, and causes them to contemn what is old and
esteem what is new. And I repeat again that there is no greater mischief a State can suffer
than such a dictum and doctrine; just listen while I tell you how great an evil it is.
[Clin.]: Do you mean the way people rail at antiquity in States?
[Ath.]: Precisely.
[Clin.]: That is a theme on which you will find us no grudging listeners, but the most
sympathetic possible. (797a-d)
LS: Because they are the representatives of the oldest, the arch-reactionaries,
conservatives and so on. The Athenian Stranger has gotten the right audience for this
theme. Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.]: I should certainly expect it to be so.
[Clin.]: Only say on.
[Ath.]: Come now, let us—
LS: Whether all of these things would need an interpretation, I don’t know. I can’t
interpret them right away. But Plato did not write these things merely in order to gain
another line. There must be some hesitation upon the part of the Athenian, otherwise the
whole thing becomes unintelligible. And why does he hesitate? This question would have
to be answered. I don’t possess the answer, but one would have to think about that.
Continue.
Reader:

257
[Ath.]: Come now, let us listen to one another and address one another on this subject
with greater care than ever. Nothing, as we shall find, is more perilous than change in
respect of everything, save only what is bad,—in respect of seasons, winds, bodily diet,
mental disposition, everything in short with the solitary exception, as I said just now, of
the bad. (797d)
LS: The problem is, of course, how rare or frequent the bad things are. If, generally
speaking, all things are fine, change is of course not desirable. But if badness is very
common, then change would be desirable. That is a sudden switch from prohibition
against change of the good toward the suspicion against change in general. That is a
grave step. But Plato indicates here the premise of the whole transition, that is, the rarity
or frequency of badness. Nevertheless, in spite of the fact that Plato did not believe in the
rarity of badness, he had a bias against change—not a naïve prejudice, but a considered
opinion. We must keep this in mind. Continue.
Reader:
Accordingly, if one considers the human body, and sees how it grows used to all kinds of
meats and drinks and exercises, even though at first upset by them, and how presently out
of these very materials it grows flesh that is akin to them, and acquiring thus a familiar
acquaintance with, and fondness for, all this diet, lives a most healthy and pleasant life;
and further, should a man be forced again to change back to one of the highly-reputed
diets, how he is upset and ill at first, and recovers with difficulty as he gets used again to
the food,—it is precisely the same, we must suppose, with the intellects of men and the
nature of their souls. For if there exist laws under which men have been reared up and
which (by the blessing of Heaven) have remained unaltered for many centuries, so that
there exists no recollection or report of their ever having been different from what they
now are—
LS: The situation of Crete.
Reader:
then the whole soul is forbidden by reverence and fear to alter any of the things
established of old. By hook or by crook, then, the lawgiver must devise a means whereby
this shall be true of his State. (797e-798a)
LS: Now this statement is as important, as significant, as the one which Aristotle makes
in the second book of the Politics on this subject of change—the section in which he
discusses Hippodamus and where the whole question of the change of laws is discussed
coherently by Aristotle. The principle, as stated by Aristotle and here also by Plato, is
this: that which owes its dignity to habituation acquires its powers through
changelessness. An interrupted habituation is not a full habituation. For most men all the
rules which they obey have acquired their dignity for them through habituation.
Therefore, the sacredness of habit or custom is a primary principle of social life. And you
see in the second statement (toward the end of the section which we read) there was no
longer any reservation made4 [on] behalf of good laws in particular. Any lawgiver must
guarantee this changelessness.

258

Student: Don’t you regard this as not completely acceptable, in some senses?
LS: Surely not. To tell you what I suspect, the hesitation of the Athenian (797d) has
something to do with the difficulty. He had to swallow something. That takes time, and
that gives the other fellow, who is impatient, the opportunity to say: Go on. Surely.
Student: What you are suggesting then, is that he doesn’t really mean this.
LS: Oh no, it is not so simple. Let us take the two faulty extremes: chaos, on the one
hand, and completely frozen customs on the other. I don’t make a distinction now
between good and bad customs, but rather say any customs. Both are faulty extremes.
There must be some light, but there must also not be complete boundlessness. As John
Dewey in his wisdom put it,iv the two elements must be there. Impulse alone would mean
chaos; custom alone would mean lifelessness. Both must be present. Now what Plato and
Aristotle mean is this: of the two faulty extremes, the one, the frozen custom, is
preferable to the complete anarchy. If you have to choose between these two evils, then
the frozen custom is a lighter evil, because it makes [society] at least possible. 5 The other
would be destructive of society altogether. So the primary need is stability. That is surely
not the whole need. We want to have reasonable customs, sure, but this is not so easy to
get as custom altogether. That is the problem. The modern inclination, generally
speaking6—although not of all modern men by any means, but of the purely modern men,
the specifically modern men—is rather to the other extreme. You see the point? This was
wholly alien to Aristotle.
Student: I didn’t realize that extremes were being talked about here. I thought an
ethically neutral statement was being made about custom, and that is that if a thing has to
be changed it is better not to have it changed. It is better not to change.
LS: But you see that even in this extremely conservative book, the most conservative that
Plato ever wrote,7 in the beginning he refers to a law, an alleged Cretan or Spartan law, to
the effect that in the absence of young men with their wild tempers, and among very old
men, one may speak about laws and customs to be changed and they should be changed.
There is a much greater distrust of change than in modern times. There is no question
about that. But this goes8 very well together with the awareness of the need for change,
only the danger of change is so considerable that the need for change must be very great
in order to accept the change. The burden of proof rests with the changers, not with the
preservers. In modern times there is a school of thought which says just the opposite.
That is the issue: Does the burden of proof rest with the preserver or with the changer?
Now human nature remains the same, and there is a lot of preserving within a society no
matter what the “intellectuals” would say. And, by the way, they would admit that; they
speak of the inertia. But we are speaking now of the doctrines of the thinkers, and there
the distrust of change as such was much greater in premodern times than in modern
times. And the external expression, and most important expression, is the doctrine of
sovereignty as it was developed in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, which meant
iv

See, e.g., Human Nature and Conduct: An Introduction to Social Psychology (1922).

259
ultimately the provision of an engine for change. One who was not bound by the law, by
any law, he could change laws.
Student: Yes, well, I was taking this in a slightly different sense. I was approaching it on
the basis of my own modern understanding that a system which doesn’t adapt itself to
change, the change which is given to it, is bound to fail; whereas here it seems to be
implied that change is bad for its own sake and you shouldn’t try to adapt to it.
LS: Yes, but that is an overstatement of the issue. And as for adaptation to change, that is
a very difficult question, because not in all cases is it simply wise. One cannot be so
certain that a change which has taken place cannot be reversed. We are too sure of
knowing the future. They were less sure of that. Now let us assume that a certain change
has taken place in a given direction. Now you say we must adapt ourselves to that
change. A man can very well say: Why not reverse the trend?
Student: Well, you have already said that the change is given.
LS: Even then. For example, let us assume you have a great dissolution of manners, to
use the favorite example of earlier thought—which is, by the way, not completely
obsolete because even the most modern men are shocked by juvenile delinquency. This is
of course only a particularly shocking case of a dissolution of manners. Now what do you
do, say, in the case of juvenile delinquency? Let us adapt ourselves to the situation, i.e.,
that juvenile delinquency is going to stay with us, and thus we take it into consideration
that so and so many innocent citizens will be bumped off by these people and assume that
we can afford it. Or do you not try to change that trend by bringing about a state of affairs
in which the percentage of juvenile delinquents would be, say, as it was in 1920 rather
than what it is in 1959?
Student: Well, of course you try to change it. But in respect of laws, of which we were
now speaking, we can’t simply go around with the laws which were good in 1890.
LS: Surely, that is quite true. These laws, which are understood as serving a restorative
function, are different from other laws. It makes a great difference whether they are only
meant to bring about a return to an earlier and better state of affairs. You cannot treat
them on the same level, because there you have the expectation that after 9 such and such
a time these laws will fall into disuse because they are no longer necessary. At any rate,
you must not forget that this notion of trends—I do not say that in some respects one may
not be able to discern trends—was not that of the ancients. The ancients were much less
certain than we are of (a) the possibility of recognizing such trends, and (b) especially,
regarding the necessity of accepting the trends. That makes a great difference. In order to
clarify all these things, however, it is really necessary to ascend to what is popularly
known as first principles; and the first principle implied here is the idea of progress,
which in a crude but very powerful form would mean this: that generally speaking the
trends, the changes, are for the better. Well, if that is so, only a fool would be a
conservative, or at least such a man would be a conservative only in limited matters. But
if it is so that one does not know, which is a more cautious view, then one will not simply

260
speak of change but will ask what kind of change, a change in what direction. And then
he will make his policy depend on that.
The classical view was not that—that change may be as well for the better as for the
worse—but rather a distrust of change. There is no doubt about that. The moderns, on the
other hand, developed a trust in change. The ancients had a distrust in change. You could
say that the perfectly sober position would be neither trust nor distrust. Surely, one would
have to go into the question of why the distrust in change. Was it a mere backwardness,
or was it a facing of this alternative of the two faulty extremes, i.e., frozen custom on the
one hand, anarchy on the other, and [considering] which evil was feared most strongly
and on what grounds? Perhaps we have too great a trust in the stability of the traditional
safeguards against anarchy. They were closer to the chaos than we are or than we believe
we are, because I think now there is a considerable awareness in the Western world that
we are very close to chaos. But twenty years ago, to say nothing of fifty years ago, there
was a certainty that that can never come again, this initial chaos. For example, I
remember Sorel,v who was regarded as a particularly open-minded man in his time, was
absolutely sure that Europe in particular could never fall back into barbarism. I don’t
want to speak of these people who said there could never be a war, a world war prior to
the First World War, because it would destroy the banking system of the West. I have
heard that as a child. And today we are no more aware than the generations before us of
the proximity of chaos. Premodern men all lived in that proximity to chaos.
Student: But aren’t there a number of contemporary thinkers who would take the
position that change is not either good or bad? The attachment of goodness or badness
simply obfuscates the problem.
LS: No, if someone would say change is not necessarily change for the worse, it would
be a reasonable opinion. We know so many examples of changes which were changes for
the good. So that is nonsense. The question is not this. But if you say, “Let us look or
speak of change, and forget about good and bad,” then I am afraid that unreason talks
through you. We cannot forget about it.
Student: Well, I wasn’t suggesting this.
LS: I know. I have learned from you that you are not a positivist and I am very happy
about that. But the question, to repeat, is this: whether the classical or the premodern
view, which was apparently unnecessarily distrustful of change, whereas modern men are
inclined toward the also irrational expectation toward change, is better. What are the
basic premises? Now in one case the premise is the proximity of chaos, and in the other
case is the certainty that chaos has been overcome once and for all.
Student: Didn’t the American Constitution illustrate a distrust for change?

v

Georges Sorel (1847-1922), French philosopher and syndicalist, author of Reflections on
Violence (1914).

261
LS: Yes, sure, at least in the interpretation of this which I have been taught to accept, that
of the Federalist Papers and Hamilton against such people as Thomas Jefferson. But that
is a long question. Surely that existed more in former times, but the question is really
whether this and the explication offered in the Federalist is really so averse to change and
in such a radical way as Plato was. I believe that this not true, although I could not now
quote chapter and verse.
Student: I wonder if the Constitution is a very good example, because the Constitution
includes a built-in mechanism for change.
LS: You can even state it very simply as follows. The mere distinction between the
Constitution (which is very difficult to amend) and laws (which are extremely easy to
change under this same Constitution) shows the difference.
Student: But to return to Plato, his analogy is of the lawgiver as a sea-captain steering
through a storm of chance, constantly legislating.
LS: Not constantly legislating, but wisely looking ahead and making laws which are
likely to weather the severest storms . . . vi customs in general, without making a
distinction between good and bad customs and spoke only of the necessity of having
unchangeable customs. But what about the rational or true? What about that, not customs
in general but rational or true? What about that? What about change in regard to the
rational or true? That should be unchanged, surely. So in other words, what Plato does
here (and here I am going back to the old point) is what he does throughout the book, i.e.,
he makes a consciously illegitimate transition from that which is legitimately changeless
because it is rational to that which is not legitimately changeless. It is the old story of
nous, nomos, logos. Nomos is not nous simply; it may very well be very irrational. But
there is a certain kinship, if only on the basis of this simple consideration that every law,
no matter how foolish and unjust, is universal. It speaks always of all who do this and
this. Even if it says all carpenters, or maybe in the sense of discriminating against all of
one group, it is still all. This universality is better than mere whim. There have been
interesting studies made, e.g., that by Lon Fuller of Harvard in the Harvard Law Review,
vii of the most impossible and bestial Nazi laws, and it has been shown that these were
humanity itself compared with the Nazi practice. The mere fact that they stipulated
something universally served as a limit to arbitrariness; to say nothing of the fact that
even the Nazis could not say publicly certain things, and the law is necessarily public
which they upheld in secrecy. So law as such is a blessing: that goes through Plato and he
surely means it quite seriously. It can be a very poor blessing, that we all know, but still
we must not forget completely that law as law is a blessing. It is the first protection
against mere whim.

vi

There was a break in the tape at this point.
Lon L. Fuller (1902-1978), American legal philosopher, author of The Morality of Law (1964).
See Lon Fuller, “Positivism and Fidelity to Law: A Reply to Hart,” Harvard Law Review 71
(1958): 630-673. Hart’s article, to which Fuller responds, is in the same volume.
vii

262
Now from this distinction between nature and habit and the possible opposition of the
two, and the necessity of accepting certain customs which are by no means perfect, there
follows the necessity of consecrating the customs, of which he speaks at the beginning of
book nine. We turn then to the substantive point regarding the choruses. After all, we are
speaking of education. We can[not], of course, 10 read the whole thing, but only one
passage, 800c, page 43.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, in our part of the world this is what happens, one may almost say, in nearly
every one of the States. Whenever a magistrate holds a public sacrifice, the next thing is
for a crowd of choirs—not merely one—to advance and take their stand, not at a distance
from the altars, but often quite close to them; and then they let out a flood of blasphemy
over the sacred offerings, racking the souls of their audience with words, rhythms and
tunes most dolorous, and the man that succeeds at once in drawing most tears from the
sacrificing city carries off the palm of victory. Must we not reject such a custom as this?
For if it is ever really necessary that the citizens should listen to such doleful strains, it
would be more fitting that the choirs that attend should be hired from abroad, and that not
on holy days but only on fast-days—just as a corpse is escorted with Carian music by
hired mourners. Such music would also form the fitting accompaniment for hymns of this
kind; and the garb befitting these funeral hymns would not be any crowns nor gilded
ornaments, but just the opposite,—for I want to get done with this subject as soon as I
can. Only I would have us ask ourselves [again] this single question— (800 c-e)
LS: There is a connection between this and what we have seen first about this fright of
children and its correction by choruses—by motions and sounds in the first place, and by
choruses later. Now we are confronted with a much higher phenomenon than these
simple devices of nurses regarding babies, motions, and sounds. We are now confronted
with the true choruses. What is their function? To produce an atmosphere of holiness, the
opposite of blasphemy. But what is the opposite of blasphemy in Greek? The opposite is
the word which means giving utterances which bode well. Blasphemy is literally an
utterance which bodes ill, for example, by provoking the ire of the gods. This holiness is
auspicious holiness. It is separated from tears and mourning. The city’s piety is not a
tearful or mourning piety. I believe there is a connection between this fact and the
emphasis on the funeral problem, given by the fact that the funerals were the example of
legislation discussed at the very beginning of the fourth book. A friendly and not a
depressive or sad religiousness is characteristic of this city.
But we have to go on. We may come back to a few relatively minor things, but we must
move on. We turn to 803c, page 53. I would like to mention how this is introduced. Up to
this point he has spoken of the problem male/female and the different, although partly
identical, education. From this he makes the transition to the assertion that human affairs
are not worthy of great seriousness, of a much broader theme. Now let us read that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] What I assert is this,—that a man ought to be in serious earnest about serious
things, and not about trifles; and that the object really worthy of all serious and blessed

263
effort is God, while man is contrived, as we said above, to be a plaything of God, and the
best part of him is really just that; and thus I say that every man and woman ought to pass
through life in accordance with this character, playing at the noblest of pastimes, being
otherwise minded than they now are. (803c)
LS: Let us stop here for one moment. Men are only playthings of a god, of the god. That
was already said in 644a, but there man was called a plaything of the gods, not of the
singular. This is of some importance. Man is only a plaything, therefore man cannot be
taken seriously. What must be taken seriously is god and god alone. And this has
something to do, I believe, with the fact that—this follows the male/female discussion—
that god is beyond the sexual distinction. Man is only a plaything of the gods. In other
words, man’s true seriousness can only be play. I remind you of the critique of tears and
mourning in the section which we read last. Now the Greek word for play is paidia, and it
is very close to another Greek word, paideia, which means education. The Greek word
for education is derivative from pais, child, [education being] that which you do to
children. And paidia is of course also related to children because children are supposed to
play, not grownups, except occasionally. So man’s life consists in his playful activities
and there is an easy transition in his education. But the Cretan doesn’t understand. Let us
go on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Now they imagine that serious work should be done for the sake of play; for they
think that it is for the sake of peace that the serious work of war needs to be well
conducted. But as a matter of fact we, it would seem, do not find in war, either as existing
or likely to exist, either real play or education worthy of the name, which is what we
assert to be in our eyes the most serious thing. It is the life of peace that everyone should
live as much and as well as he can. (803d)
LS: Here he criticizes the prevailing error: the serious is for the sake of the play. War, the
serious thing, is for the sake of peace. Is this not strange? Did Plato himself not tell us
that war is only to be waged for the sake of peace, and not the other way around? What is
wrong? How does he refute this error? There is no play, no education in war. But we can
also say: Who claimed that war or wars contained play or education? Or does he mean
that in the accepted opinion play and peace is taken as the justification of [the]
seriousness of war, and that this justification is false? So in other words, if we live for the
sake of play, then we should not even think of seriousness. If we live for the sake of
peace, we should not even think of war. What does he mean? Let us read a few more
lines.
Reader:
What then is the right way? We should live out our lives playing at certain pastimes—
sacrificing, singing and dancing—so as to be able to win Heaven’s favour and to repel
our foes and vanquish them in fight.
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. What is now the seriousness, or rather the play? The
play consists in sacrificing, singing and dancing, and this serves another purpose. One

264
would assume that this is a serious purpose. What then is the seriousness here? To be able
to make the gods gracious towards one’s self and to be able to vanquish the enemies in
battle. Making the gods gracious and defeating the enemy, that is the seriousness; and the
play is now sacrificing, singing and dancing. Or is it the other way around? That is the
great difficulty, and I believe that the interpretation of the whole thing will depend on
that. Now man’s true life should be play. And what is according to Plato man’s true life?
I think we must always have recourse to that. Philosophy. Then philosophy would be the
true play or education; and then the other life, say, the political life, would be the
seriousness. And in this connection, although I cannot now develop it, I believe this is the
crucial passage for seeing the connection between piety and fighting. To make the gods
gracious to one’s self is piety and to defeat the enemies in battle is fighting. I think I
would start from this. I believe you brought this up in connection with other passages.
One must realize that this subject of piety plus fighting is linked up here with the whole
question of what is man’s true destiny. What is the true life of man? Now it is
characteristically called here play, in opposition to seriousness. It is partly a pun. Play,
game, education—education in the highest sense, i.e., philosophy. Do you see any light
here in this very difficult passage? At any rate, this is a key passage, as you will see form
the fact that Megillus feels compelled to enter the discussion. Let us turn to that passage,
804b, and read his speech as well as the following speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Meg.:] You have a very mean opinion, Stranger, of the human race.
[Ath.:] Marvel not, Megillus, but forgive me. For when I spoke thus, I had my mind set
on God, and was feeling the emotion to which I gave utterance. Let us grant, however, if
you wish, that the human race is not a mean thing, but worthy of serious attention.
(804b-c)
LS: You see, that is the issue between the Athenian and Megillus, and of course also
Clinias. The Athenian says he can’t take human affairs seriously because he has looked
away toward the god. But then he makes a concession. If you like it, if you prefer it, then
the human race may be seen as worthy of some seriousness. That is the issue in
controversy between the philosopher and the political man. This is a most remarkable
passage; I don’t believe there is a parallel to that anywhere in the Platonic dialogues.
But let us now consider some of the other important passages. Let us turn to 815b (page
93). It is in the midst of a very long speech by the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So, in the first place, we must draw a line between questionable dancing and
dancing that is above question. All the dancing that is of a Bacchic kind and cultivated by
those who indulge in drunken imitations of Pans, Sileni and Satyrs (as they call them),
when performing certain rites of expiation and initiation,—all this class of dancing
cannot easily be defined either as pacific or as warlike, or as any of one distinct kind. The
most correct way of defining it seems to me to be this—to separate it off both from
pacific and from warlike dancing, and to pronounce that this kind of dancing is unfitted
for our citizens—

265

LS: “Is not political” would be a more literal translation. “Does not belong to the polis.”
Reader:
and having thus disposed of it and dismissesd it, we will now return to the warlike and
pacific kinds which do beyond question belong to us. (815b-d)
LS: You see, that refers to the same theme which we had at the beginning. This has
something to do with this kind of sad and depressing form of piety which he regards as
verging on the blasphemous. Now in this connection, we come almost immediately to the
question of comedy and tragedy. He takes comedy first, and we should begin with the
paragraph on page 97 (816b).
Reader:
[Ath.:] What concerns the actions of fair and noble souls in the matter of that kind of
choristry which we have approved as right has now been fully discussed. The actions of
ugly bodies and ugly ideas—
LS: “Ideas” is of course an impossible translation. That is a Lockean term and not a
Platonic term. Thoughts, or conceits, you could say, but certainly not ideas. Idea has in
Plato a very specific meaning. What we call now an idea, a big idea or a wonderful idea,
is Lockean terminology and not Platonic.
Reader:
and of the men engaged in ludicrous comic-acting, in regard to both speech and dance,
and the representations given by all these comedians—all this subject we must
necessarily consider and estimate. For it is impossible to learn the serious without the
comic, or any one of a pair of contraries without the other, if one is to be a wise man; but
to put both into practice is equally impossible, if one is to share in even a small measure
of virtue; in fact, it is precisely for this reason that one should learn them,—in order to
avoid ever doing or saying anything ludicrous, through ignorance, when one ought not;
we will impose such mimicry on slaves and foreign hirelings, and no serious attention
shall ever be paid to it, or shall any free man or free woman be seeing learning it, and
there must always be some novel feature in their mimic shows. Let such, then, be the
regulations for all those laughable amusements which we all call “comedy,” as laid down
both by law and by argument. (816d-e)
LS: What then is his decision regarding comedy? Is it forbidden or permitted? It is
permitted, but not to be done by citizens, only [by] foreigners. There is no objection to
that.
Student: There seems to be one difficulty here. We have to know about these things,
ugly thoughts and ugly actions, and yet they are not to be really taken seriously. How
then are we to know them completely?

266
LS: To take the question first. Moral education in an extreme way could, of course, mean
that one simply doesn’t see, hear or smell anything evil. That was not Plato’s view. There
is a famous discussion of this subject in Plato. Do your remember that?
Student: In the Republic.
LS: And what does he say?
Student: Well, it is in respect to the judges and whether they should engage in unjust
actions. And it is pointed out that it is not necessary that they do so.
LS: The difference between the physician and the judge: a physician becomes better
when he has been ill himself; a judge does not become better if he has been a criminal
himself, to put it simply. But the judge must know evil, otherwise he can’t be a good
judge. But Plato contends that one can know evil only through observation, without doing
it. He speaks not only of judges but of the whole citizen body. They should know evil.
And the way to learn evil, the most innocuous way of learning evil, is to see evil people
portrayed in comedies: the miser and whoever you might think of. Whether you can
present every evil in a comedy is another question. For example, a homicidal maniac is
not [a] fitting subject for a comedy, at least only in a considerably diluted version. But
what I find particularly striking is that he says they must always make something new in
comedies. That is contrary to the general prohibition against inventions. What did you
say in your report in explaining that?
Student: To prevent their becoming consecrated by custom.
LS: There could also be another reason. If you are to see comedies in the first place, if
you grant that, did you never hear of stale jokes? If this same miser or same sick man
would be shown constantly always this and nothing else, few people would come. It
would no longer be interesting. But if something interesting and funny which happened in
the last year is presented, it will have an attraction and also a purifying effect.
Student: Although tragedy can be seen again and again.
LS: Yes, because there we are not concerned with laughing. Laughing is a kind of
concession to pleasure.
Student: Can one cry always at the same thing?
LS: Perhaps there is a slight bias in favor of laughing rather than of crying which goes
through the whole thing, as we have seen before. But we must first read the passage
regarding tragedy.
Student: I take it they are not to be shown the really horrible aspects.

267
LS: No, no. That would not be possible in a comedy. It wouldn’t be a comical figure. But
that depends on the genius of the comic poet. He could perhaps present an absolutely evil
fellow as a comic figure. I give you a very simple example. I saw a presentation of Stalin
by Melvyn Douglasviii which was really quite good, given the limitations on this kind of
thing, and this showed the absolutely ridiculous character of this ruling group, how
Khrushchev kills Stalin by one stroke of his hand preventing the timely medication. It
was an extremely funny scene. You can imagine that Melvyn Douglas must be comical in
himself. But this is a question. I believe it depends on the inventiveness of the poet. Of
course you cannot present the shooting down of many people in a comedy, that is out of
the question, but you can show this mass murderer from his comic side.
Student: I was thinking specifically of anger or hatred.
LS: Not as a comic gesture, but he could very well include disgust. But now let us see
what he says about tragedy, in contradistinction to comedy, as it appears in the immediate
sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Now as to what are called our “serious” poets, the tragedians,—suppose that some
of them were to approach us and put some question such as this,—“O Strangers, are we,
or are we not, to pay visits to your city and country, and traffic in poetry? Or what have
you decided to do about this?” What would be the right answer to make to these inspired
persons regarding the matter? In my judgment, this should be the answer,—“Most
excellent of Strangers, we ourselves, to the best of our ability, are the authors of a tragedy
at once superlatively fair and good; at least, all our polity is framed as a representation of
the fairest and best life—
LS: As an imitation.
Reader:
“which is in reality, as we assert, the truest tragedy. Thus we are composers of the same
things as yourselves, rivals of yours as artists and actors of the fairest drama, which, as
our hope is, true law, and it alone, is by nature competent to complete. Do not imagine,
then, that we will ever thus lightly allow you to set up your stage beside us in the marketplace, and give permission to those imported actors of yours, with their dulcet tones and
their voices louder than ours, to harangue women and children and the whole populace,
and to say not the same things as we say about the same institutions, but, on the contrary,
things that are, for the most part, just the opposite. In truth, both we ourselves and the
whole State would be—”
LS: We know this theme, by the way. The tragic poet makes different people say
different things about the same thing. But in our city everyone will say the same things
about the same matters, at least of importance.
viii

Melvyn Douglas (1901-1981), American actor. Douglas portrayed Stalin in a 1958 episode of
the American television anthology “Playhouse 90,” entitled “The Plot to Kill Stalin.”

268
Reader:
“absolutely mad, were it to allow you to do as I have said, before the magistrates had
decided whether or not your compositions are deserving of utterance and suited for
publication. So now, ye children and offspring of Muses mild, do ye first display your
chants side by side with ours before the rulers; and if your utterances seem to be the same
as ours or better, then we will grant you a chorus, but if not, my friends, we can never do
so.” (817a-d)
LS: Now let us see that. Again, is tragedy permitted or not?
Student: Yes.
LS: It is permitted, but it is interesting that if you read this whole section on comedy and
tragedy once, on the basis of a first reading, [it seems that] the permission for comedy is
more easily given than the permission to tragedy. First a very strong argument is made
against it, and then it boils down again to a concession. Seemingly, there is a stronger
opposition to tragedy than to comedy. That is quite interesting, but perfectly in line with
this anti-mourning, anti-tears element which goes through the whole book. But in this
passage itself, why does he say that what we are doing is the truest tragedy, meaning the
legislation? This is usually read from the point of view, from the assumption that for
Plato tragedy is the highest form of art. But this is of course by no means certain.
Tragedy is the most effective form of art. That Plato says frequently.
Student: I was going to say that tragedy is not only something to be thought of in terms
of its effects but it is also something in itself. In other words, purgation or catharsis is not
the only element, and perhaps what Plato means when he says we are the truest writers of
tragedy is that the very necessity of law and legislation is a tragic thing.
LS: Yes. Yes, I think so. And the fact [is] that he calls them, the tragic poets, here the
serious ones, the serious poets. We have seen (803c) that there is a question regarding all
seriousness. It also fits more closely together with the idea that tragedy and the polis are
closer together than [to] comedy. Comedy is somehow questionable. But you see also
that he says in the passage which we just read that there is an identity of purpose between
the legislator and the poet, at least the tragic poet. We must never forget that. There is a
real rivalry between the two which is not identical with but akin to the rivalry between
poetry and philosophy of which he speaks in the tenth book of the Republic.
Student: . . .
LS: That is something which goes through from the beginning to the end of this book—
this whole world of fear, sorrow, complaint, and so on, everything connected with that,11
the blasphemy, to use the language Plato uses. In that sense you are right.
Student: . . .

269
LS: Now in the sequel he discusses the intellectual education proper, speaking of
reading, writing and then of the mathematical disciplines and astronomy. These passages
are all very long. But there is one point which we should read, regarding these necessities
to which you referred (818). Let us take the next long speech of the Athenian after the
one where we left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] There still remain, for the freeborn, three branches of learning: of these the first is
reckoning and arithmetic; the second is the art of measuring length and surface and solid;
the third deals with the course of the stars, and how they naturally travel in relation to one
another. All these sciences should not be studied with minute accuracy by the majority of
pupils, but only by a select few—and who these are we shall say when we have come
near the end,—since that will be the proper place— (817e-818a)
LS: In other words, it is in a way beyond this theme. It appears at the end of this political
discussion, as we shall see. It comes up to some extent already in the tenth book. But you
must not forget what has been going on. We have been marching from early morning and
we will arrive in darkness. These deeper subjects are discussed, in the tenth and twelfth
Books especially, when it is already growing dark. That corresponds to their difficulty, to
their abstruseness, to their aloofness.
Reader:
but for the bulk of the pupils, while it would be shameful for most of them not to
understand all those parts of them that are most truly termed “necessary,” yet it is not
easy nor even at all possible for every student to go into them minutely. The necessary
part of them it is impossible to reject, and probably this is what was in the mind of the
original author of the proverb, “Not even God will ever be seen fighting against
Necessity,”—meaning by this, I suppose, all kinds of necessity that are divine, since in
relation to human necessities (to which most people apply the saying when they quote it)
it is of all sayings far and away the most fatuous. (818a-b)
LS: What does he mean by that? Let us first make a simple presupposition. Necessary is
distinguished in Plato and Aristotle from the noble. Necessary is what you have to bow
to, which imposes itself upon you. The noble is that which is desirable for its own sake.
For example, an operation is necessary but it is nothing noble. That does not mean that
the necessary things are not terribly necessary: they may very well come in the first place,
but they are not that for which we live. And also the simple needs of the body are12
necessary—food, drink, and so on—but that is not the thing for which a reasonable man
would live. Now the mathematical sciences do partake of the necessary, e.g., the practical
uses. That is what he means. You cannot have an army without counting how many men,
and other things. So the necessary part, the part required for practical purposes, that must
be taught13 [to] every citizen. And then he comes to this quotation or remark by the poet
that even god does not fight with necessity. The poet in question was a rather cynical
man, and thus it is a long question as to what he understood by this—whether he meant
such cases as Zeus and Hera, i.e., this scene in the Iliad where Zeus could not resist Hera.
What he might have thought of this is a long question. We have only fragments of this

270
poet, that is the trouble. And applied to the gods it is silly to say that, because a god
would be of course beyond these creature kind of necessities. But which are the divine
necessities? God will not fight against divine necessities. What are they?
Student: I was wondering whether perhaps this might be the gods’ own natures—that
they would have tried to make something other than themselves.
LS: That could be something. That could be. But here it is somehow . . . what is the
connection between that and mathematics?
Student: The principle of contradiction.
LS: I see. In other words, that would be common to mathematics. Let us read the sequel.
Reader:
[Clin.:] What necessities then, Stranger, belong to these sciences, that are not of this sort,
but divine:
[Ath.:] Those, as I believe, which must be practiced and learned by every god, daemon,
and hero, if he is to be competent seriously to supervise mankind: a man certainly would
be far from becoming godlike if he were incapable of learning the nature of one and of
two, and of even and odd numbers in general—
LS: Nature is, of course, his gratuitous addition. “If he couldn’t learn one and two and
three and altogether the even and the odd ones.”
Reader:
[and if he knew nothing at all about counting,] and could not count even day and night as
distinct objects, and if he were ignorant of the circuit of the sun and moon and all the
other stars. To suppose, then, that all these studies are not “necessary” for a man who
means to understand almost any single one of the fairest sciences, is a most foolish
supposition. (818b-d)
LS: What does he mean by that? Now he uses the same notion of necessity, but in a
different sense: necessity not for the polis, but necessity for the most noble pieces of
learning or subjects of learning. What are they?
Student: The laws.
LS: Here it is not said. Maybe. But still, what does he say in the Republic, where he is
more explicit about this?
Student: The ideas.
LS: The ideas. Mathematics is the prerequisite for dialectics. And he calls the idea of the
good the greatest piece of learning or subject of learning. And here he speaks in the plural
of the pieces of learning. So mathematics is necessary for philosophy. In other words,

271
there is an ambiguity regarding these divine necessities. First, the necessity governing the
numbers themselves, which makes this an exact science. No—first, on the lowest level,
the necessity for political, practical purposes. Then the necessity governing the realm of
numbers themselves. And third, the necessity of numbers for the understanding of the
highest. And only the two latter are called divine necessities, not the first.
And then we come to this long discussion of commensurability, incommensurability and
irrationality. Can you explain in a few words what the problem is?
Student: Pythagoras is reputed to have discovered that certain linear magnitudes are not
measurable by a common measure. In a square, for example, if you draw a diagonal,
there is no common measure that can apply to both the diagonal within the square and the
square. So they are incommensurable with each other.
LS: And what about the relation of numbers and magnitudes?
Student: Well, other than that, I don’t know of any incommensurability. There might be
a problem in mathematical precision as far as bodies are concerned.
LS: Yes, but does it not arise14 immediately also regarding numbers? If you take the
simple case,ix now if you try to figure out the length of this line—
Student: As I understood the argument, I think the problem is not that there are irrational
numbers but that you can no longer say of things that they are numerable, that is, so far as
I understand that, there simply is no number.
LS: Sure, irrational numbers presuppose already an enlargement of the original Greek
notion of numbers. That wouldn’t be a number—the square root of two. Even fractions
create a problem. And it is very strange that he has such a long discussion
proportionately—a disproportionately long discussion on this subject. I draw your
attention to the section beginning 819d5. That is quite remarkable. He discusses that in
this section. Now if you look at it merely externally, without looking at what it says but
only at how the page looks, then you see that it comes much closer to a Socratic dialogue
than anything we have read hitherto. Is it not strange that just on this occasion, when this
relatively speaking high problem of commensurable and incommensurable comes up, the
dialogue approaches the Socratic dialogue? This is linked up with another fact: the
discovery of incommensurability is said to be a non-Greek discovery. We Greeks all are
in this error. Well, were other people not in that error? What does he mean by this? I
don’t know the literature in the history of Greek mathematics, but I am sure that this
passage has been discussed very thoroughly. What can we make out on this subject on the
basis of the passage itself? Do you remember any parallel in a Platonic dialogue?
Student: One of the speeches in the Meno.
ix

The transcriber notes that Strauss “draws an isosceles right-angled triangle on the blackboard
with legs marked one, and points to the hypotenuse.”

272
LS: Sure. In other words, the only dialogue between Socrates and a slave, the Meno,
deals with mathematics, and fundamentally with the same problem. By the way, I don’t
remember now, but was Meno’s slave Greek or foreign?
Student: He asks if he can speak Greek.
LS: But that doesn’t mean, of course, that he was Greek by race.
Student: He was raised in such a house.
LS: And I believe there is a certain connection between this strange thing. And it is very
interesting to see that this slave boy reaches a much better understanding in the dialogue
of mathematical problems than these old statesmen do. That is also very interesting. One
would have to read the Meno very thoroughly in the course of seeking an interpretation of
this passage.
Student: Do you think that there is any connection between the Meno and the practice of
bringing in slaves for comedies?
LS: Could be. That is a good point. Incidentally, in this connection, in 820e hex calls,
perhaps for the first time, Clinias “Stranger.”xi The Athenian always calls them by their
names, if he uses an elocution. Here he calls him “Stranger.” There is another such
reference in this same area.
Now there is another point which we should consider, and that is astronomy. That begins
almost immediately after (820a, page 111).
Reader:
[Ath.:] We commonly assert that men—
LS: No, a bit before that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Shall we not, then, lay these down as necessary subjects of instruction, so that
there may be no gap in our code of laws? Yet we ought to lay them down provisionally—
like pledges capable of redemption—apart from the rest of our constitution, in case they
fail to satisfy either us who enact them or you for whom they are enacted.
[Clin.:] Yes, that is the right way to lay them down.
[Ath.:] Consider next whether or not we approve of the children learning astronomy.
[Clin.:] Just tell us your opinion.
[Ath.:] About this there is a very strange fact—indeed, quite intolerable.
[Clin.:] What is that?
[Ath.:] We commonly assert that men ought not to enquire concerning the greatest god
and about the universe, nor busy themselves in searching out their causes, since it is
x
xi

That is, the Athenian Stranger.
Laws 820e2. The Loeb translation neglects to translate the Greek ō xene in the Athenian’s line.

273
actually impious to do so; whereas the right course, in all probability, is exactly the
opposite. (820e-821a)
LS: You see, that is one of the many passages we have in which this is made clear: that
according to the common Greek view, to inquire into what the gods do is an impious act.
There is a reference to this problem, by the way, also in the first book of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics, but there are also many more passages. Philosophy or inquiry as such was a
problem for the Greeks. Now go on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] My statement sounds paradoxical, and it might be thought to be unbecoming in an
old man; but the fact is that, when a man believes that a science is fair and true and
beneficial to the State and altogether well-pleasing to God, he cannot possibly refrain any
longer from declaring it. (821a-b)
LS: You see, there are three conditions. The truth is not enough. And the central is that it
must be useful to the city. There is no question of an unqualified freedom of study.
Continue.
Reader:
[Clin.:] That is reasonable; but what science of this kind shall we find on the subject of
stars?
[Ath.:] At present, my good sirs, nearly all we Greeks say what is false about those
mighty deities, the Sun and Moon.
[Clin.:] What is the falsehood?
[Ath.:] We assert that they, and some other stars along with them, never travel along the
same path; and we call them “planets.”
[Clin.:] Yes, by Zeus, Stranger, that is true—
LS: That is the second time that Clinias swears. The first oath occurred in 814b8. It might
be interesting to see, to consider there also the context. Here we see, of course, why he
swears, because that is a subject directly related to the gods.
Reader:
[Clin.:] for I during my life, have often noticed how Phosophorus and Hesperus and other
stars never travel on the same course, but “wander” all ways; but as to the Sun and Moon,
we all know that they are constantly doing this. (821b-c)
LS: What does he mean by that? He is a special observer of the stars, as we have seen
regarding the morning and evening stars. But how do we know that the sun and moon just
do not follow regular courses? Everyone knows that they do that, i.e., that they are not
regular. What does he mean by that? I don’t know. Does he refer to eclipses?
Student: . . .

274
LS: I see. Well, the one who will read the paper on books 10 or 19 should keep this in
mind, especially book 10, I believe. This discovery of the regularity is said to have
changed the relation between science and religion, as we would say, completely, because
as long as this was regarded as not regular, atheism had a certain justification. Therefore
we must keep this in mind.
Now there are a few more passages which we may not have time to discuss. Incidentally,
this first oath in 814b is in connection, I believe, with a right of asylum mentioned there,
which was a major issue in classical antiquity, as it was in the Middle Ages and in
modern times. You know that penal justice could be evaded by the simple device of
touching an altar—I mean, there is a certain irrationality in that from the point of view of
penal justice. And that plays a role somewhere in Euripides.
Compulsory education for both sexes is the last point I would like to make. And paid
teachers from abroad. In the first place, you see that Plato did not wish to starve teachers,
as some modern scholars would have him do and thus arouse the hatred of the academic
profession against Plato. But why from abroad? Well, it is below the dignity of the
citizens to be schoolteachers, that is clear. But on the other hand, to use slaves would be
below the dignity of the future citizens. The only way out is free strangers, strangers who
are free men.
There are many more subjects into which we cannot go, but I believe that this important
subject touched near the beginning of the book regarding the origins of the music [which
is developed here], that man must move his limbs and give sounds—you remember that
this was mentioned already in the first and second book15—constitutes the deeper thread
of the argument. And then what was brought out in the paper regarding this connection
between piety and fighting as a dimension of seriousness, that is also an important issue.

1

Moved “the first.”
Deleted “that they.”
3
Deleted “called.”
4
Deleted “in.”
5
Deleted “society.”
6
Deleted “is.”
7
Deleted “that.”
8
Deleted “up.”
9
Deleted “to.”
10
Deleted “not.”
11
Deleted “in.”
12
Deleted “also.”
13
Deleted “by.”
14
Deleted “also.”
15
Moved “which is developed here.”
2

275
Session 11: February 19, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —and I am glad to see you made some progress. i Now one
thing I did not quite understand, although your report was on the whole true and correct:
you tried to subordinate everything in this book under the heading, “leisure.” That is not
quite convincing to me. Especially, what do you mean regarding the relation between
leisure and sex?
Student: Well, the mention he made in here that the leisurely activities lead on to sex
because of the fact that these citizens would be free of very harsh, menial labor.
LS: Yes, but there is a certain ambiguity, because for the Greeks, and especially for men
like Plato and Aristotle, leisure does not mean quite what it means today, where it is
simply the opposite to work. There is some third thing in their opinion, and that is
relaxation. It is not leisure. If you work, you need relaxation, but relaxation is in the
service of work, the breathing spell between work. But leisure is that for the sake of
which work exists. So leisure and relaxation are two entirely different things, the one on
the lowest level, relaxation, and leisure on the highest. Therefore leisure is of course
activity, not just lying around and looking at the stars or whatever it may be. Leisure is
activity. It is only a liberal activity—liberal in the old sense of the word, for example,
when we speak of the liberal arts—whereas work is an illiberal activity, if one may say
so. And relaxation is nonactivity: sleeping, for example. This is lower than work because
you are reduced to a state of complete potency, so to speak, as distinguished from act. So
that is I believe not a sufficient formula for our book.
On the other hand, when you said the body, that is true. Only I wish you had not said
material things because that is an un-Platonic expression, the term “matter” having been
coined by Aristotle. And even whether one could call it material in Aristotle’s sense is a
long question. But in using the word body we understand what you meant, because the
three subjects here—gymnastics, sex, and food (livelihood)—all have to do with the
body. This much about your paper.
It is perhaps good if we remind ourselves briefly of the subjects we have discussed and
which we still have to discuss. We had first—disregarding now the destructive or
negative part—the examination of the Cretan and Spartan law, and the introduction as to
the character of a true polity (book 4) and the need for preludes, as a definite proposal the
magistracies, and then the rest of the work is devoted to the laws according to which the
magistrates have to act. The first great theme was marriage, and then we had education,
quite naturally because education is primarily education of children. This was finished by
the end of book 7. And now in this work we have gymnastics, sex—to use this word,
since eros is not so intelligible—and food. And what about the sequel? I remind you of
one thing. If you look at the beginning of book 9, which may not come out in the English
translation, at the very first word—those of you who can look at the Greek text will see
i

Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.

276
this is—well, heii says judicial proceedings, lawsuits. But the Greek word dikai is the
plural of the word dikē, which means something like justice, and including also especially
criminal justice. I looked through the books. Only book 1and book 9 have such emphatic
beginnings: book 1, as you remember, god; and book 9, dikai. All others have, if I may
say so, trivial beginnings. In other words, a considerable part of books 9 to 12 deal with
judicial things and especially with penal justice. We come to that next time. Now let us
turn to a discussion of the text.
He begins indeed not with gymnastics, as today’s report has shown, but with the festivals
to the gods. But that is a very brief discussion and it insensibly switches into the subject
of gymnastics—thus underlying the theme of which we have spoken last time, piety and
fighting—a subject which you find in 803d, seventh book. Piety and fighting, they belong
together, at any rate, in any pagan morality. For example, today in1 imperial Japaniii you
have something of this sort. Now let us look at the beginning, 828a1 to 7. Let us read the
first speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Our next task is, with the help of the Delphic oracles, to arrange and ordain by law
the festivals, prescribing what sacrifices, and to what deities, it will be good and right for
the State to offer: the times and the number of them, however, it is, no doubt, our own
business to ordain by ourselves.
LS: In the Greek that is much more cautious. “Perhaps it would seem our business to
legislate about” that.
Reader:
[Clin.:] Very likely, as regards the number of them.
[Ath.:] Then let us first state the number. (828a)
LS: Let us leave it at that, although they go a bit beyond that. The main point is this. The
substance of these things is not established by the legislator, not by the philosopher, but
by the traditional religious authorities. The polis, any polis, depends on an established
form of piety, an established religion. Philosophy cannot take care of that. That is
axiomatic for Plato as well as for Aristotle. This does not mean that they regard this as
the most important subject, but as something which is important but regarding which
philosophy is powerless and with which it has to live and come to terms, which it cannot
establish. A little bit later in this long speech the Athenian asserts very emphatically that 2
[life] is not preferable to3 [death], and in a way this is the basis of the following
argument. This means, in other words, the abolition of fear. If it is really indifferent to
you whether you live or die, then you have overcome fear most radically. Why is that so,
and what does this mean in this context? Now let us turn to page 127 in your edition, line
8 or so from the top. Here he says “union,” namely, union of body and soul, “is in no way
better for soul and body than dissolution.” Will you read from here on?
ii
iii

That is, the translator.
The Empire of Japan was the Japanese political entity from 1868 to 1947.

277
Reader:
[Ath.:] Moreover, if they are to arrange these matters adequately, these persons must
believe that no other State exists which can compare with ours in respect of the degree in
which it possesses leisure and control over the necessities of life; and believe also that it,
like an individual, ought to leave a good life. (828d-829a)
LS: Incidentally, he says not “of all cities” but “of all present cities.” Continue.
Reader:
But for a good and blessed life, the first requisite is neither to do wrong oneself nor to
suffer wrong from others. Of these, the former is not very hard, but it is very hard to
secure immunity from suffering wrong—
LS: Suffering wrongs, yes.
Reader:
indeed it is impossible to gain this perfectly, except by becoming perfectly good. So
likewise a State may obtain a life of peace if it becomes good, but if bad, a life of war
both abroad and at home. (828d-829a)
LS: Now here he alludes to something which has been a theme from the very beginning,
by making this statement: that a good man—and the same would apply to a good polis—
by virtue of its goodness, will not suffer wrong. The old story. We had this in book 1
already. The divine good, virtue, procures the human goods, life and whatever we need.
But he indicates the difficulty: that for the good man it doesn’t make a difference whether
he lives or dies. Therefore it would seem to follow that it doesn’t make any difference to
the good city whether it perishes or whether it survives. What is not indifferent to it is
how it lives as long as it lives. At any rate, it would seem that the divine goods procure
the human goods because they create an indifference to the human goods; therefore, if
you don’t need them any more, that can also be called a kind of procuring the human
goods. Let a human good be wealth, or some degree of wealth. [That] divine good
procures human good [cannot imply that] virtue procures wealth, which is nonsense. But
if you say virtue brings you into a position where you are indifferent as to whether you
are rich or poor, to that extent it procures the human good. That one could say. The Stoic
solution, as it were.
You notice also that he makes here a strict parallel 4 [between] the polis and the
individual. And then he makes a transition from this subject to severe military training,
which is developed in the immediate sequel. But here we must remember the fact,
emphasized in the first book, that the bad city may very well vanquish a good one, as the
Athenian had pointed out to Megillus in particular. So this is a very great problem, which
will come up later, namely: How far is virtue sufficient for happiness? That virtue is the
core of happiness, that is both Plato’s and Aristotle’s view; but it is a long way from
saying virtue is the core of happiness to saying that virtue is self-sufficient in the sense
that it guarantees you happiness completely. This is, I think, a great theme of the section

278
on sex, to which we come later. Now let us look, a little bit further on, at 829c to d (page
129). Begin on line 4.
Reader:
[Ath.:] At each of these they must distribute prizes and awards of merit, and compose for
one another speeches of praise and blame, according to the character of each one exhibits
not only in the contests, but in his life generally, magnifying him who is accounted most
good and blaming him who is not.
LS: In other words, these are the means for making men courageous.
Reader:
Such speeches not everyone shall compose; for, first, no one who is under fifty years old
shall compose one, and further, no one shall do so who, though he may be fully proficient
in poetry and musisc, has not yet performed any noble or notable deed. But, even though
they be not musical, those poems shall be sung which are composed by men who are
personally good and honoured in the State as performers of noble deeds. (829c-d)
LS: You see that is a somewhat changed position. Formerly it was understood that the5
[poetry] of musical words should be of poetic excellence, and in addition it should be
moral, but now he makes allowance for poetically defective things, provided the authors
are very highly respected citizens, which is a considerable change of orientation. You can
easily see what kind of poems we would get from time to time. I believe that in all
countries such products exist. You know that very respectable men on a given occasion
produce a poem which is listened to respectfully by everyone, but that is about it. Now
that has something to do, I believe, with the theme. Here the demands of the city are
much more in the foreground that they were before. Now let us go on and read the end of
830e, page 133.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In this latter kind they will engage in contests with one another throughout the
whole country, contending in the capturing of forts and in ambuscades and in all forms of
mimic warfare; in fact, they shall do literal fighting with balls and darts as nearly real as
possible,—though the points of the darts shall be made less dangerous,—in order that
their games of combat may not be devoid of some element of alarm, but may provide
terrors and indicate to some extent who is stout-hearted and who not: to the former the
lawgiver shall duly assign honours, to the latter degradation, that thus he may prepare the
whole State to be serviceable throughout life in the real contest. Moreover, if a man gets
killed in these sham fights, inasmuch as the murder is involuntary, he shall pronounce—
LS: I would translate here “homicide” in order not to make it unnecessarily harsh. You
know the story of this marine sergeant last year, or whenever it was. That is not murder, it
is homicide at the most.
Reader:

279
the slayer to be pure of hands, when he has been legally purified; for he will reflect that,
when a few men die, others equally good will grow up in their places, whereas, once fear
is, so to speak, dead, he will be unable to find a test to distinguish, in all such cases, the
good from the bad,—and that is a far greater evil than the other for a state. (830e-831a)
LS: We don’t need more than that. The crucial point, and I think you mentioned this in
your paper, is that fear must not die. There is a certain contradiction between that demand
and what was said earlier about the abolition of fear, by saying that there is no preference
to be given to life as distinguished from death, to the union of body and soul as
distinguished from their separation. That is a problem. The polis cannot exist in fact
without this fear. The whole difference between courage in every political sense and
cowardice requires that. Therefore the human goods have a certain independence of the
divine goods, and the problem of virtue and happiness comes up in its full strength. That,
I think, we have to consider.
Here in the sequel the question is raised: Why is this kind of very tough military exercise,
with live ammunitions, not used in many cities? And the first answer given is greed for
wealth. In other words, people want to have a nice and pleasant life, and that is of course
much more disturbed by dangerous military exercises than by soft ones.
Student: I just wanted to ask whether the kind of military exercises he had in mind might
be similar to the jousting tournaments of the medieval period.
LS: Only I believe there was less emphasis in fighting from horseback than on foot; the[y
are] heavily armed soldiers, you know, and they fight.
Student: Vigorously, but not . . . well, did Plato intend for them to try to injure one
another?
LS: Not try, but if it is a tough thing . . . well, you know very well that in any of these
kind of things people can be hurt. And Plato says that should be the least worry, even if
someone is killed in the process. And it is on the whole better if every year one or two or
three die.
Student: It is something like what we would call war maneuvers.
LS: Yes, sure. And therefore, I used the more contemporary example of live ammunition
versus non-live ammunition, i.e., blanks. The desire for wealth and the desire for easy
living are supposed to go together, which is not a hard demand on our credulity, I believe.
Rich people generally live more pleasantly than the poor ones, and many people are
induced to prefer wealth to poverty because they like not money but what money can
buy, a pleasant life. This needs a long story because there are of course also misers, as we
know, but they are rarer than the people who like money for use.

280
Now there is an important passage at the end of 831, where he describes how money and
the desire for money affect differently different people. That is on page 135, bottom, to
137, top.
Student: Before you pass on, is there any reason for Plato’s associating freedom of
poetic speech with military operations? I mean, he sort of interchanges and alternates
between them in the same passage, and it would seem to me that these are normally
separate subjects. I wondered if there is a reason for him putting them together in this
section.
LS: That is a very good question. Last time, in the discussion of the various subjects
regarding music, of education, there is an enumeration which comes out very clearly in
the text afterwards. Then he sets off the various topics by such expressions as
“furthermore,” “moreover,” and so on, and it becomes somewhat unclear toward the end,
and I couldn’t make out precisely what it is. I would have to study it much more carefully
than I can now. But the praise of good men is at least a very important subject. Now this
jibes with the Republic: in the Republic it is said in the tenth book that legitimate poetry
is limited to two themes: the hymns to the gods and praise of good men. Now since
military prowess is a politically very important thing, praise must be given to the
courageous warriors, naturally, and perhaps even more than to other things. You see, for
example, you remember what he said about moderation: that there is a certain kind of
moderation, or temperance which one can expect from everyone, but which on the other
hand doesn’t give any title to distinction. You know, common decency, and no one will
be praised for being commonly decent. But for someone who does great exploits of
bravery in battle, he will be praised, naturally. The change I would say is here only this:
that these poems in this connection are not supposed to be very good poetry. The main
point is that the poets are, say, old generals. That is more important than that they are
great poets. Naturally the great military past of the general gives the poem a splendor, if a
nonpoetic splendor, which poetic splendor could not supply. Later on we will see, when
he makes a transition to sex, that there is another and more detailed reference to the
muses, to poetry, and there he doesn’t say that generals have to make the poems. Well, he
doesn’t say here, as a matter of fact, that it has to be generals, but it is a good illustration,
I believe, of what he proposes. Those of you who have a military past can very well
imagine how this would have been if one day the general would have come and read a
poem to you about your great achievements. That would have impressed you much more
than a poem by Carl Sandburg,iv which militarily wouldn’t exist, I think. It is funny, but
the funniness is not created by us. It is really there in the subject matter, that inevitably
people will produce this kind of poetry because there is a real demand for it and at all
times. Now let us read this passage on the bottom of page 135.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Then let this which I describe be laid down as one cause which hinders the States
from adequately practicing either military operations or any other noble pursuits and
iv Carl Sandburg (1878-1967), American poet, writer, and editor. Perhaps his most

famous poem is “Chicago,” which first appeared in Poetry magazine in 1914.

281
which turns men who are of a quiet nature into traders, ship-owners, and servants, while
of the bold it makes pirates, burglars, temple-robbers, fighters and despots,—and that
though, in some cases, they are not ill-natured, but merely ill-fortuned. (831e)
LS: Yes, this is an important statement: here he says how greed affects different natures.
And first we have the famous Platonic distinction between orderly or modest, or
moderate and temperate natures, and courageous or manly natures. Now the orderly ones
are made traitors and such kind of people, and the others are made, to take the extreme
case, temple robbers. The interesting thing is that traitors and temple robbers are treated
on the same level; morally there doesn’t seem to be a difference here. I would say there is
even a slight excuse or sympathy for the second type. He says they are sometimes not of
a bad nature but only unhappy. He doesn’t make this qualification when he speaks of the
first class of people. I thought that is quite interesting. That reminds of the passage in the
first book of Aristotle’s Politics, when he enumerates the kinds of acquiring a livelihood
which are in principle respectable; and robbing is mentioned among them.
Student: Piracy.
LS: Piracy, all right. But that is robbing. No, he says lesteia, if I remember well, which
means also land robbery. I mean, why should sea robbers have this privilege which is
denied to land robbers? And there an old, warlike morality of mankind is still reflected.
And he does not say anything of this sort about traitors. The two things may go together.
You can by force of arms compel people to buy from you and sell to you; that is an
interesting intermediate case.
Student: Should this be connected then with the rank of virtues?
LS: Yes, from a certain point of view. But that is not simply true, because common
decency counts for something. That is ambiguous. There are Platonic passages to both
effects. Here we must remind ourselves of the Hipparchus, among other Platonic
dialogues, where he speaks of the subject of gain and of the ambiguity of this subject.
Now people are averse to these tough military exercises for two different reasons. The
first is greed. And what is the second? Let us turn to the sequel; we can go on where you
left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, how could I describe otherwise than as utterly unfortunate men who are
compelled to go through life with hunger always in their own souls?
[Clin.:] This, then, is one cause: what is the second cause you speak of, Stranger?
[Ath.:] You are right in reminding me.
[Meg.:] One cause, as you assert—
LS: Now watch this. Clinias says this again. He changed that to Megillus, I believe,
without any reason.

282
Reader:
is this lifelong, insatiable pursuit, which wholly engrosses each man, and hinders each
and all from rightly practicing military operations. Be it so: now tell us the second cause.
[Ath.:] Do you think that I am delaying to do so because I am at a loss?
LS: The Athenian is hesitant to mention this point. This much is clear. And therefore he
exercises an indirect compulsion on the interlocutor to repeat his question. What is the
second cause? We must see why he hesitates.
Reader:
[Meg.:] No; but we think that, owing to a sort of hatred against the character you
describe, you are castigating it more severely than is required by the argument now atv
hand.
LS: In other words, Clinias is not so averse to the greed for money 6 [as] our Athenian
Stranger is.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Your rebuke is just, Strangers; you want, it seems, to hear what comes next.
[Clin.:] Only say on.
LS: Why? Why does he say “Only say on”? Because the Athenian still is silent,
naturally. That is clear. What is then the second reason? That comes in the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] There lies a cause, as I affirm, in those non-polities which I have often mentioned
in our previous discourse,—namely, democracy, oligarchy, and tyranny. For none of
these is a polity, but the truest name for them all would be “faction State”; for none of
them is a form of voluntary rule over willing subjects, but a voluntary rule over unwilling
subjects accompanied always by some kind of force; and the ruler, through fear of the
subject, will never voluntarily allow him to become noble or wealthy or strong or brave
or in any way warlike. These, then, are the two main causes of nearly everything, and
certainly of the conditions we described. The polity, however, for which we are not
legislating has escaped both these causes; for not only does it enjoy a great amount of
leisure, but the citizens also are free from one another’s domination, and as a
consequence of these laws of ours they will be the least likely of men to be money-lovers.
Hence it is both natural and logical that of all existing polities this type alone should
welcome the system above described, which combines military schooling with sport—
(832b-d)
LS: Now what is the second reason, apart from greed, why most polities are averse to
tough military training? I think it is a rather cryptic passage.
Student: The rulers are afraid of training the general populace in these virtues. In other
words, they are afraid they will be overthrown.
v

In the Loeb: “now on hand.”

283

LS: That is a very good point. In other words, in all other cities, he says, there is a subject
population which has no share in ruling, and therefore the ruling segment is interested in
not arming and training them.
Student: Might his hesitancy to continue with the second cause be connected with the
subjection of the Helotsvi and the Perioecivii in Sparta?
LS: That is also a good point. But at any rate, you see he is hesitant and he expresses
himself with much less clarity on the second cause than on the first cause. But he means,
I believe, also this broader subject, this very delicate subject: Can you arm everyone in a
community in which there is not full freedom for all? Full freedom for all, that is to say,
all obedience is based on voluntariness and in no way on force or compulsion. But is this
so simply true of our city here? We must look at it dispassionately. Why not?
Student: Well, everyone is not able to be a citizen. There are those who are not first class
citizens in the first place, and there is a group who controls those who are very closely.
LS: But still, the fact that there are people who are wealthier and other who are poorer,
this kind of inequality does not make the first masters and second slaves, or something of
this kind.
Student: No, but the people who are brought in as teachers and traders and so on do not
have the status which these people have.
LS: Yes, and you have slaves, of course.
Student: But will they be engaged in these military things?
LS: No, surely not. But one reason, he gives us to understand, is that we need arms and
an armed populace not only against foreigners but also against the domestic slaves. For
both purposes, in both respects an army is needed, surely. But you see the delicacy with
which he expresses himself about the subject. Plato was aware of the problem that here
an element of injustice does come in, if we apply severe and strict standards, although he
would say this kind of injustice is [no] worse than the other injustice: abolition of slavery.
We must make this clear to ourselves. Let us beware of the basic flaw which we have. I
believe one doesn’t have to say excessive self-love as Plato [does]; one can use a more
civil expression and say, I think, the basic flaw of all of us is that we want to eat the cake
and have it. That is, I believe, more practical in seminar discussions to assume that. Now
what is that? I know some people who love modern democracy and at the same time love
Aristotle, and in order to reconcile these two things they minimize everything which is
not bearable from the point of view of modern democracy. I think we shouldn’t do that.
Aristotle was a very venerable man, but he was not a democrat, we cannot deny that, and
in particular he accepted slavery. And similar considerations apply to Plato. Now for
vi
vii

A group of enslaved inhabitants of Sparta.
An autonomous group of free, noncitizen inhabitants in and around Sparta.

284
Plato and Aristotle, the question could be stated as follows. They saw the injustice of
slavery. Aristotle makes it very clear which kind of man could be justly enslaved, and
they are of no use unless you have very much time to explain every little thing that these
moronic fellows should do. They are not the slaves whom you could really use. But the
question for him was this. A highly civilized society requires a leisured class, and that
meant slavery. The choice is this: either you want to have a kind of drabness in which the
higher faculties of man cannot develop—and there are some people who would say that is
better because it is juster, but Aristotle and Plato would say then you do injustice to some
people, and to the best people. The alternative is of course to close an eye a bit toward the
rough and ready form of justice, to put it mildly, which is implied in getting slaves by
war, as was in fact done.
Now let us see another passage which has something to do with the subject. 832e, the
speech after the next of the Athenian where you left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Most important of all things for war is, no doubt, general activity of the body, of
hands as well as feet—activity of foot for flight and pursuit, and of hand for the stand-up
fighting at close quarters which calls for sturdiness and strength.
[Clin.:] No doubt.
[Ath.:] Yet, surely, neither of these is of the greatest service when it lacks weapons.
[Clin.:] Certainly not. (832e-833a)
LS: That is a very interesting remark. Xenophon, who was frequently a more openly
witty man than Plato liked to be, has a nice discussion in the Anabasis about when the
ambassador of the Persian king comes and asks the Greeks to hand over their weapons.
You remember what Xenophon says?
Student: Come and get them.
LS: No, no. It is more subtle.
Student: Well, when we keep our arms we keep our virtue.
LS: So they need their arms in order to be able to exercise their virtue. So virtue is the
most important thing. But still, as far as this kind of virtue is concerned, you need arms.
Now we can easily enlarge that and take the Aristotelian formula, i.e., virtue needs
equipment, and here such a question as wealth in all its harshness comes up again.
Now we drop the rest about gymnastics, which is at the end of 834, and find a new
reference to music here, which we should perhaps read. 835, page 147.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Of what character each of these ought to be in respect of words, songs and tunes,
blended with rhythm and dance, has frequently been stated by the original lawgiver; the
secondary lawgivers should follow him in their enactments, and they should arrange the

285
contests at convenient times to suit the several sacrifices, and thus appoint festivals for
the State to observe.
Now as to these and the like matters, it is by no means hard to perceive how they should
be given legal regulation, nor indeed would a shifting of their positions cause much gain
or loss to the state. (835a-c)
LS: Now is this not a remarkable statement in the light of what we have read before? Did
he not originally say that the severest possible freezing after the model of Egypt is
desirable? Is this not strange? So you see how the position changes. And this is not just
thoughtlessness or moonheadedness on7 [his] part, but it has something to do with the
subject matter. If you take the one extreme represented by the remark about what I called
the generals’ poems in praise of a soldier without any poetic quality—that is one
extreme—the other extreme is the perfect freedom for the gifted poet. And in between
you have then this kind of poet, but what they produce must be recognized by the
political authority and must be frozen. Here the freezing is dropped. There is always, I am
sure, a connection between these varying statements on poetry and the particular context
in which 8[they are] made. And perhaps we can find this later. Here, to repeat, a much
greater liberty for change is given than was before. Now read the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] [But the] things which do make no small difference, and of which it is hard to
persuade men—these form a task especially for God (were it possible that orders should
come from him): as it is, they are likely to require a bold man who, valuing candour
above all else, will declare what he deems best for city and citizens, and in the midst of
corrupted souls will enjoin what is fitting and in keeping with all the constitution, and
gainsay the mightiest lusts, acting alone by himself with no man to help him save, as his
solitary leader, Reason. (835b-c)
LS: Here he says the best solution would be if a god could do that, if it were only
possible that commands could come from him. The implication being, positively stated:
there are no commands from gods. Aristotle states the same thing very clearly, more
clearly than Plato here, toward the end of the Eudemian Ethics. You know, there are three
Aristotelian Ethics traditionally ascribed to Aristotle. One, the most famous, is the
Nicomachean Ethics, which everyone calls the Ethics, and then there is also one called
the Eudemian Ethics, the Ethics ascribed to Eudemos. And toward the end of this there is
a very important passage from all points of view in which Aristotle says, among other
things, god does not rule by issuing commands. He doesn’t deny that god rules, but he
does not rule by issuing commands. How then can god rule if he does not rule by issuing
commands? Well, by being what he is, by being the end. That has something to do with
the great issue discussed by Plato: whether piety consists in doing what the god does, i.e.,
imitation of god, or doing what god tells men to do; in other words, what god gives
commands about. That is impossible, and therefore one needs a daring man, a man who
dares to do what only a god could really do.

286
There is then this reference to music, and then he shifts into the discussion of sex in the
immediate sequel. Now here we have to think also for one moment. Why should sex take
the place of music? Let us say “eros” instead of “sex.” Does this make sense, that the two
are treated somehow as interchangeable?
Student: I can see that the ordering of them, or the treatment of them, might be similar. I
can’t see that the two are interchangeable. In other words, one might regard that both
have to be made moderate or both have to be—
LS: No, no. Well, then you could take almost anything together. But does anyone see a
connection between these two themes, love and poetry?
Student: The passionate element in both of them.
LS: Yes. I have heard that in present-day American slang they use the word romance for
love. Now romance is of course originally one form of fiction, of poetry: the romantic
quality. Love is an infinitely more poetic subject than eating and drinking; I don’t have to
labor that point. Lessing makes somewhere a remark, I believe in the [Laocoön], I think
he says9 that love originated the muse.
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, yes. There may be something to that. Now here the question arises regarding
love in particular—the regulation here. And that is perhaps the most important illustration
of the great theme discussed throughout the work: how pleasure and virtue go together,
the thesis being that the most moral life is the most pleasant life. The concrete difficulty
occurs here in this connection. Is the most noble life the most pleasant life? And that has
something to do with the problem of bodily love. Now let us begin here, since we cannot
read the whole discussion, in 835e (page 149). Begin with the speech of the Athenian on
that page.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Naturally: but I will try to explain myself more clearly. When in my discourse I
came to the subject of education, I saw young men and maidens consorting with one
another affectionately; and, naturally, a feeling—
LS: “Affection,” I believe, is too strong an expression for philophronos. “In a friendly
way.”
Reader:
of alarm came upon me, as I asked myself how one is to manage a State like this in which
young men and maidens are well-nourished but exempt from those severe and menial
labours which are the surest means of quenching wantonness, and where the chief
occupation of everyone all through life consists in sacrifices, feasts and dances. In a State
such as this, how will the young abstain from those desires which frequently plunge

287
many into ruin,—all those desires from which reason, in its endeavour to be law, enjoins
abstinence?— (835d-e)
LS: Logos he translates by “reason.” All right, reason attempts to become law. There is a
tendency in reason to become a law. You remember perhaps the definition of law given
in the Minos, the last definition. Do you remember it?
Student: Law is knowledge of reality.
LS: Not quite: wishes to be.
Student: But I thought that was changed in the end.
LS: Yes, sure. But the official definition is wishes. Now what he says in the Minos from
the point of view of the law—that the law tends to be knowledge—he says now from the
other point of view: that knowledge, let us say, tends to become law. But that means of
course also that while there is a certain kinship (otherwise there would not be such a
tendency) there is also a difference: that never will a law be simple reason and vice versa.
So the difficulty was stated to begin with. We have here a class of people who have much
free time on their hands and therefore the ordinary impediments do not exist. What shall
we do about that? Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] That the laws previously ordained serve to repress the majority of desires is not
surprising; thus, for example, the proscription of excessive wealth is of no small benefit
for promoting temperance, and the whole of our education-system contains laws useful
for the same purpose; in addition to this, there is the watchful eye of the magistrates,
trained to fix its gaze always on this point and to keep constant watch on the young
people. These means, then, are sufficient (so far as any human means suffice) to deal with
the other desires. But when we come to the amorous passions of children of both sexes
and of men for women and women for men,—passions which have been the cause of
countless woes both to individuals and to whole States—
LS: The “woes” is an addition not based on the manuscript. That is based only on the
oldest Plato edition, not on the manuscript. The “woes” are not in there. “Of myriads of
things” we must say, because Plato would not say that eros is the cause of innumerable
evils only. So.
Reader:
how is one to guard against these, or what remedy can one apply so as to find a way of
escape in all such cases from a danger such as this? It is extremely difficult, Clinias.
(835d-836b)
LS: He stresses this point again, that it is so very difficult and a subject of the utmost
importance. Then in the sequel the question concerns in the first place, pederasty, as we
see, because this was a special problem in Crete. There was a statement in the first book

288
according to which the Cretans had introduced this unnatural vice. Now let us see how he
proceeds. Now he contends that it is unnatural as is shown by the beasts. Even the beasts
are completely free from that, and all the more so should man be free of it. And a bit after
that we can go on, page 151, middle.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Moreover, that object which, as we affirm, the lawgiver ought always to have in
view does not agree with these practices. For the enquiry we always make is this—which
of the proposed laws tends toward virtue and which not. Come, then, suppose we grant
that this practice is now legalised, and that it is noble and in no way ignoble, how far
would it promote virtue? Will it engender in the soul of him who is seduced a courageous
character, or in the soul of the seducer the quality of temperance? Nobody would ever
believe this; on the contrary, as all men will blame the cowardice of the man who always
yields to pleasures and is never able to hold out against them, will they not likewise
reproach that man who plays the woman’s part with the resemblance he bears to his
model? Is there any man, then, who will ordain by law a practice like that? Not one, I
should say, if he has a notion of what true law is. (836d-e)
LS: More literally, “if he has in his mind the true law.” If the true law is in his mind.
Only then. What about this argument? How does he argue, apart from the example taken
from the beasts, which is perhaps not conclusive, for all I know? What does he say here?
Why is this incompatible with virtue? He gives the specific argument for the two cases,
for, as he says, the seducer and the seduced. Plato says the persuader and the persuaded.
What does he say of the persuader and what does he say of the persuaded?
Student: Well, here he brings in the subject of virtue whereas in the earlier argument it
was only an unnaturalness.
LS: Yes, that was one thing. And the argument regarding nature was simply taken from
the conduct of all beasts. Beasts are strictly heterosexual, and therefore it is natural. That
is one point. That of course does not settle completely the question, because man’s nature
is different from that of the beasts; therefore, the other consideration of virtue enters.
What is the argument regarding virtue here?
Student: Well, the argument is simply that in neither case do these practices, sanctioned
by law, lead to virtue. He mentions the virtue in specific.
LS: But different virtues in the two different cases. Now what does he say? The
persuader cannot be temperate, moderate. The persuaded cannot be manly because he
behaves like a woman. Does this settle the issue, because there are certain disagreements
between these statements here and those in the Banquet, for example? What about if you
turn it around, cannot the persuader be manly and the persuaded be temperate, moderate,
modest and so on? That is a question.
Now the argument becomes terribly complex in the sequel, but we have to read about a
page more.

289

Reader:
[Ath.:] What then do we declare to be the truth about this matter? It is necessary to
discern the real nature of friendship and desire and love (so-called), if we are to
determine them rightly; for what causes the utmost confusion and obscurity is the fact
that this single term embraces these two things, and also a third kind compounded of
them both. (836e-837a)
LS: By the way, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that he uses here in this
connection (836d7 and 837a3) the terms eidos and idea, the typically Platonic
expressions for the idea, and this is not completely irrelevant. Now the question is this.
There are three eideis, three forms or kinds. Which are they? There are two primary
forms of love, and then there is one which is a compound of the first two. That is the
great question. And in the sequel we will find a great mixup until we reach at the end a
simple solution, which he could have stated right away if he had wanted to. I will say first
what he says at the end. The clear cases, the clear forms, are love of the soul alone, what
is popularly called Platonic love, and purely bodily love. And the mixture is the love of
the body and soul together. But that is by no means clear from the beginning. Let us see
how he goes on from here.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Friendship is the name we give to the affection of like for like, in point of
goodness, and of equal for equal; and also to that of the needy for the rich, which is of the
opposite kind; and when either of these feelings is intense we call it “love.” (837a)
LS: Eros, yes. So in other words, eros is from this point of view the genus, and is divided
into two types: love of equals for one another, and love of the poor or of the needy for the
rich—love of unequals, that is to say. But the [love of] unequals is clearly defined as love
of the needy for the rich, not love of the rich for the needy. Someone laughed. Why?
Student: . . .
LS: But that would not be real love, would it? I mean, that would be love for the property
of the rich but not love of the rich, unless you were to say that every merchant loves his
merchandise because he watches it very carefully.
Student: He could also perhaps . . .
LS: Did you ever read Plato’s Banquet? There he gives a definition of eros in the form of
a story. Eros is the child of poverty and, say, wealth. Poverty and wealth. Therefore eros
consists essentially in striving for what he does not possess but for what his father
possesses: wealth. Now this must of course be properly understood. The ordinary wealth
is of no interest: the true wealth is the soul. But what is the main point in this remark? He
says love is either love of equals—and we understand that—or of unequals. But in the
case of unequals he excludes love of the rich, in any sense of the word “rich,” for the
poor, in any sense of the word “poor.” That is an old story in Plato and Aristotle.

290

Student: The poor love them in some sense because they are wealthy, but the wealthy
love the poor because they are poor . . .
LS: But he doesn’t speak of any love of the wealthy for the poor.
Student: Precisely, why should the wealthy love the poor? The poor are in need; the
wealthy are not.
LS: So in other words, love is based on need. Yes, that is the axiom underlying both
Plato and Aristotle. Love is based on need. Therefore a being which has no need cannot
love. That is the great difference between Plato and Aristotle on the one hand, and the
Bible, that the Bible recognizes a kind of love which comes from abundance and not from
need.
Student: I don’t know, but I was just trying to puzzle this out and it seems to me that
love based on need is envy.
LS: No, not envy.
Student: Well, I mean clearly it is an entirely different thing, though perhaps not
different than the case of the love or friendship between equals and likes. We can exclude
this. And then we can possibly say that there is no love between the rich and the poor—I
mean, not in a monetary sense, because in a sense it would be the same as saying a love
between a man and a beast. There is two orders of being here.
LS: In other words, the inequality must not go beyond a certain point.
Student: Right, but if the inequality, if the unequal one somehow is made to be the equal,
to be wealthy in a proper sense, then there is in him this love or this tendency because
this is what he is meant to be. And that is why you can have the love ascending the scale
but not coming down.
LS: But then it is a transformation of love of unequals into love of equals. The striking
point is this, that he makes a perfectly simple and exhaustive distinction between love of
equals and love of unequals. That is a perfect distinction. But then he says instead of love
of unequals, love of poor for rich, which is an incomplete distinction where the other
thing, love of rich for poor, is absent. And why is it absent? Because Plato denies its
possibility. The highest, the truly perfect, cannot love the imperfect, whereas the
imperfect must love the perfect. All kinds of perversions may be, but they are bound to
depend on the perfect for their being. And I think this is really the difference between the
Bible and Plato. As he puts it in the Banquet, in the speech of Socrates it is made clear,
love is a one-way street, one could say. viii
Reader:
viii

There was a break in the tape at this point.

291
[Ath.:] [The friendship which occurs] between opposites is terrible and fierce and seldom
reciprocal amongst men, while that based on similarity is gentle and reciprocal
throughout life. (837b)
LS: Now is this not remarkable: as if we had forgotten everything which went before.
What was his suggestion regarding marriage, the typically Platonic suggestion in the
Laws as well as the Statesman?
Student: Opposites should marry.
Different student: The poor should marry the rich.
LS: And to come to the more interesting point?
Student: The temperate the intemperate.
LS: In other words, love of opposites is recommended as necessary. If you would look up
the passage 773b to c, where this is developed, you would see that even there he says that
this love of opposites is in a way against nature. But here we have this friendship of like
for like, [which] is gentle. The question I would raise here is this: Is this eros? That
exists. Say, two virtuous men loving each other, enjoying each other’s company: Can this
be called eros? Friendships of opposites, we are told here, is savage. You see what he
does is this: he replaces this friendship of the indigent, of the poor for the rich by the love
for the opposites. They are also unequal qua opposites. But that is a different point of
view, and I believe it will become still more complicated.
Now let us look at that for one moment. Now if there is friendship of opposites, there
could be, in theory at any rate, friendship of the rich for the poor—they are opposite—as
well as for all other forms of opposites, for example, the friendship of the courageous and
the temperate. But what is the relation between these two kinds of friendship, love for
one’s like or love for one’s opposite, to the great question under discussion here,
homosexuality and heterosexuality? We must never forget that. Now if we subsume
homosexuality and heterosexuality under this overall distinction, love of like or love of
opposite, what is homosexuality? I’m sorry. You have to spell it out even though it is
somewhat distasteful.
Student: Love of like for like.
LS: And heterosexuality? Love of opposites, because we would say these are opposite
sexes. Then it would follow that homosexuality is gentle and heterosexuality is savage,
passionate. Furthermore, friendship of like for like is something radically different, of
course, [from friendship] of the poor or inferior, for the rich or superior. What I am
driving at is this: we have friendship of like for like [LS writes on the blackboard], and
then we have love for unlike. And this love for unlike may be on a different plane, by
which I mean this: love of the poor for the rich, of the inferior for the superior, and then it

292
may be the opposite on the same plane, male and female. This is at least the minimum we
have to do in order to disentangle what Plato here entangled.
Student: But just one question. Is not, in the Platonic view, the love between man and
woman, even though opposite on one plane, because of the equality of man and woman
cannot that be love of equals?
LS: The love of men and women cannot be.
Student: Why can it not be in the Platonic frame of the equality of men and women the
love of equals, or love of likes?
LS: But are they not opposite sexes?
Student: Sure.
LS: But let us take the simplest case of where there is real equality, say, virtuous men or
for that matter vicious men. That is the clearest case. In the other case, where the two
sexes come in, there is a problem of opposition.
Student: But in the Platonic view, this is the question I want to raise: What is Plato’s
meaning of love? If, as to love, your point of view is simply the difference between the
sexes, it seems that it abstracts in a sense from the humanness quality of love, whereas
what makes for the equality of the sexes is somehow the divineness in human nature.
LS: No, that Plato would say exists everywhere: that man, as one would put it today,
transcends himself to the extent to which he is truly human. That would exist everywhere.
And it also can be absent everywhere.
Student: But precisely because it does exist everywhere, meaning in man and woman
both, then there can be a love of equals between them in this respect.
LS: Yes, sure, but it is not the clearest case of love of equals because the sexual
opposition is there. If you look at it from one point of view, there is more likeness in the
case of homosexuality than in the case of heterosexuality. Well, lest you be shocked, I
would like to make it perfectly clear that Plato’s opinion about homosexuality in the
narrow sense, as understood by law, is as strict as that of Moses and the Bible. But Plato
was thinking of something else always, namely, what he regarded as the highest activity
of man. And there the question of the difference of the sexes plays a very great role.
While Plato teaches officially in the Republic that there is equality of the two sexes
regarding the highest possibilities of man, if you look at what Socrates does, he is always
concerned with young men. There is not a single case where he talks to a girl. He talks all
the time to boys. That has nothing to do with the idea that Socrates did improper things;
his friend Alcibiades vouches for that. But the point is that Socrates expected more in the
highest respect from young males than from young females. That is what he is ultimately
driving at. Plato would be the last to deny that, although in a very different perspective

293
than that of Freud—if you call this [a] very sophisticated form of homosexuality, you
may call it that way. It is not meaningless, only Plato would say you cannot understand
this as a derivative from vulgar homosexuality but rather the other way around. I know
the subject is alien to us and somewhat distasteful to us, but we have to face that and
especially because we cannot properly understand this passage if we do not take this into
consideration.
Student: Well, I was just wondering if the discourse between philosophers on the highest
level, the highest discourse, if this would ever be conceived of by Plato as love for . . .
LS: No, that is what I said. Friendship, yes, but not eros.
Student: Okay. The thing is that I am trying to find a meaning for these words.
LS: I think one can state what Plato means as follows. If the element of promise is
absent, it is not eros. When Plato and Aristotle would discuss something with each other,
Aristotle is no longer a promising young man. Plato knows what he is and vice versa, and
therefore this element of tension which goes together with promise is absent. But when
he talks to a pupil, a young man, where it is touch and go, then it can more properly be
described as erotic. But you can also use eros in an enlarged sense, as he does here where
he says it includes also love of like as well as love of unlike, and then these substitutes
[come in]; and perhaps one has to use other substitutes.
Student: The problem I have is this. It is clear to say that friendship, as described here,
and lust are two entirely different things—that they are so different that they hardly even
fit . . .
LS: That is not quite so for Plato. That they are radically different, sure. But there is also
a certain kinship between them. There are passages in which Plato treats body and soul as
radically opposed in every respect, but there are also passages in which the body is
presented as reflecting the soul. For example, if you think of such a thing and if you take
the simple bodily desires, they require surely the closest possible proximity. But does not
friendship, in the strict sense of the word, also require some degree of proximity? An
epistolary friendship is not quite the same as a friendship which lives in the element of
the personal exchange. That is not so simple. For Plato the body is in a sense the opposite
of the soul, but it is also a reflection of the soul. In other words, what the legislator has to
say is something very hard and fast and unambiguous, but the phenomenon itself is not so
unambiguous. Or think of something: If one loves another human being—and I am
speaking now of love in the wider sense of the word—really loves that person, what part
of the body does one love most? Take it even on the level of ordinary heterosexual love,
and I believe the answer is unambiguous: the head, strange as it may sound. Because the
head is the most personal part, and not the so-called sexual organs. But you see here the
transition from the merely bodily to the spiritual. And when the Greeks say, for example,
in this beautiful verse with which the Antigone begins, when Antigone says: “Thou
common sisterly Ismene head”—I translate literally. Head. Surely they are sisters, and
that is a special case, but it would apply also to heterosexual love. The head is that part of

294
the body with which we are mainly concerned in love as love, and that shows that the
physical love is not merely physical. But one could also turn it around and say the merely
spiritual love is from Plato’s point of view not merely spiritual, because it is a love of
beings consisting of body and soul—and therefore the importance of physical presence,
as we say, for the full actuality of friendship, not merely epistolary [presence]. We would
vulgarly say physical presence, or personal presence, which amount to the same thing,
however. It shows that this is not so simple. The legislator must speak, as we have
learned from Plato, with an absolute absence of any ambiguity. But that means also that
he has to speak with considerable crudity, to forget about the complexity of these things.
Now let us continue in the immediate sequel. Reread the sentence you read last.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The friendship which occurs between opposites is terrible and fierce and seldom
reciprocal among men, while that based on similarity is gentle and reciprocal throughout
life. The kind which arises from a blend of these presents difficulties,—first, to discover
what the man affected by this third kind of love really desires to obtain, and, in the next
place, because the man himself is at a loss, being dragged in opposite directions by the
two tendencies,—of which the one bids him to enjoy the bloom of his beloved, while the
other forbids him. For he that is in love with the body and hungering after its bloom, as it
were that of a ripening peach, urges himself on to take his fill of it, paying no respect to
the disposition of the beloved; whereas he that counts bodily desire as but secondary, and
puts longing looks in place of love, with soul lusting really for soul, regards the bodily
satisfaction of the body as an outrage, and, reverently worshipping temperance, courage,
nobility and wisdom, will desire to live always chastely in company with the chaste
object of his love. But the love which is blended of these two kinds is that which we have
described just now as third. Since, then, love has so many varieties, ought the law to
prohibit them all and prevent them from existing in our midst, or shall we not plainly
wish that the kind of love which belongs to virtue and desires the young to be as good as
possible should exist within our State, while we shall prohibit, if possible, the other two
kinds? Or what is our view, my dear Megillus? (837b-d)
LS: Now let us read Megillus’s answer, because here the Athenian addresses Megillus
explicitly and not Clinias.
Reader:
[Meg.:] “Your description of the subject, Stranger, is perfectly correct.” (837d-e)
LS: More literally, the last [is] very emphatically stated in the Greek: “What you have
said now.” In other words, what went before either he didn’t understand or he felt that it
was much too complicated for his comfort. So the final solution is perfectly simple and
clear and fit for legislative treatment. We have the two clear and unambiguous cases of
love: purely chaste and purely unchaste. And then there is a mixture of the two, where the
body comes in, and then of course one can immediately draw the conclusion that the
mixture is between likes in soul and unlikes in body, namely, marriage of men and
women of the same temper—which is however not quite what we were promised to begin
with, you remember, where we were supposed to get men and women of unlike temper.

295
The alternative would be between unlikes in soul and likes in body, and that is excluded
here. Now here the great question arises, then, as was stated at the beginning: How to
control or abolish the unchaste forms of eros?
Student: Is the mixed one the one that is accepted?
LS: No. Preferably even not the mixed one.
Student: In which case, how does he get his future citizens?
LS: You should know that; that is a simple answer. I think Augustine has replied to this
question once.
Student: I don’t know. I never heard it.
LS: Well, regarding the problem of celibacy. Well, if the end of man would come? You
know?
Student: There is no need.
LS: Yes, sure, that is best.
Student: But this is the Laws and not the Republic.
LS: I know, but as Aristotle says, when he discusses the Laws, that while the Laws seems
to be very different form the Republic Plato in the end comes always back to that—
[namely], what he is driving at in the Republic. No, surely he does not mean it as a
practical and serious proposal, I grant you that. But this is a most difficult passage in
which all the discussions of the Banquet, these long discussions, are concentrated and one
would have to make infinitely more subtle divisions and subdivisions than those which I
made in order to bring out the whole problem. But Plato indicates the problem by this
great mixup. Here surely, Plato, making the greatest concession to pure spiritualism, says:
If we could abolish the body altogether, that would be the best solution. And there is even
Platonic evidence for that. What does he say in the Phaedo? What does Socrates say in
the Phaedo? What do the philosophers do? They long to die, to become completely
separated from the body. Surely that is not the only Platonic statement. Well, I’m sorry
Mr. ___?
Student: No, no, I think this is quite logical.
LS: Yes. Yes, sure. It may be logical but it is not exhaustive, and for this reason Plato
wrote not only the Phaedo but he wrote also the Banquet,10 which is a kind of
glorification of the eros of the living with a view to procreation. That’s also—both things
are there and how they are connected is a long story. But there is always one solution in
Plato’s opinion, I think, to all these difficulties: that there is only one perfectly

296
satisfactory solution, and that is philosophy. Philosophy reconciles in itself both the eros
for life and the longing for death, as well as the loving for justice and whatever you have.
But let us now come back to our practical question. We must never forget that we are
reading a political book, and if I state it in the proper generality you will see it is a
political problem, as you would recognize in the Sun Times or whatever you read
concerning the reports of Calumet City and this girl from the University of Chicago, how
to control or abolish the unchaste forms of eros. And now let us read the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] I know of a device at present for enacting this law, which is in one way easy, but
in another quite the hardest possible. (837e-838a)
LS: “Device” is a bit [of an] unnecessarily free translation. An “art,” techne. He has
techne for solving that problem which is, by the way, an indication of the fact that it is
not simply a natural solution. Now let us go on.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Even at present, as we are aware, most men, however lawless they are, are
effectively and strictly precluded from sexual commerce with beautiful persons,—and
that not against their will, but with their own most willing consent.
[Meg.:] On what occasions do you mean?
[Ath.:] Whenever any man has a brother or sister who is beautiful. So too in the case of a
son or daughter, the same unwritten law is most effective in guarding men from sleeping
with them, either openly or secretly, or wishing to have any connexion with them,—nay,
most men never so much as feel any desire for such connexion.
[Meg.:] That is true.
[Ath.:] Is it not, then, by a brief sentence that all such pleasures as quenched?
[Meg.:] What sentence do you mean?
LS: We could almost say “a little word”: these pleasures are quenched by a little word, or
a little saying.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The sentence that these acts are by no means holy, but hated of God and mostly
shamefully shameful. And does not the reason lie in this, that nobody speaks of them
otherwise, but every one of us, from the day of his birth, hears this opinion expressed
always and everywhere, not only in comic speech, but often also in serious tragedy—as
when there is brought onto the stage a Thyestes or an Oedipus, or a Macareus having
secret intercourse with a asister, and all these are seen inflicting death upon themselves
willingly as a punishment for their sins?
[Meg.]: Thus much at least you are quite right in saying—that public opinion has a
surprising influence, when there is no attempt by anybody ever to breathe a word that
contradicts the law. (837e-838d)

297
LS: Well, he doesn’t say “public opinion,” of course, but phēmē, which means utterance.
I don’t know how to express it. “Public opinion” has too many modern connotations
which are absent. The word “public opinion” is of a very recent origin. “Rumor” would
be the more literal [translation], i.e., what everyone says all the time. “Rumor” would be
the literal translation of phēmē. In other words, to come back to our question: that [the]
unchaste forms of eros can be controlled or abolished is shown with utmost clarity by the
prohibition against incest, where the very desires are quenched by virtue of the sacred
prohibition against incest. But this is important: a sacred prohibition. There is no absence
of a natural possibility of that. That was a long discussion in the past which is, as many
such things, implicitly underlying present-day social science discussions. It is very
interesting to read, for example, in Grotius’s War and Peace (book 2, chapter 5,
paragraphs 12 to 13) the discussion as to whether the prohibitions against incest are due
to natural law or to divine law. The answer is, roughly, that apart from the prohibitions
against intercourse between parents and children, all others are based on divine law. That
is a very instructive section because it summarizes the whole earlier discussion. Still, the
example is important. Certain forms of human sexual relations which are physically
possible are completely ruled out, and the very desires for them ruled out, by prohibition.
Why cannot we do the same regarding all other forms? Why cannot all other forms of
unchaste love, say, even of bodily love in general, be taken care of by a sacred
prohibition? Well, what would you suggest prior to reading on? Why can’t you do so
easily regarding adultery, for example, what you can do so easily regarding incest? It is
really a difficult question.
Now let us read on. In the sequel he illustrates the problem still more fully, and it appears
that the difficulty is much greater here than in the case of incest, or in other words,
consecration of the prohibition would not be sufficient. Now let us read after the
beginning of 839 (page 159, bottom).
Reader:
[Ath.:] This law, when it has become permanent and prevails—if it has rightly become
dominant in other cases, just as it prevails now regarding intercourse with parents,—is
the cause of countless blessings. For, in the first place, it follows the dictates of nature,
and it serves to keep men from sexual rage and—
LS: He doesn’t say “dictates of nature” because nature cannot dictate properly speaking.
“According to nature.”
Reader:
and frenzy and all kinds of fornication, and from all excess in meats and drinks, and it
ensures in husbands fondness for their own wives: other blessings also would ensue, in
infinite number, if one could make sure of this law. Possibly, however, some young
bystander, rash and of superabundant virility—
LS: We must not be ashamed to translate literally: “full of much sperma, seed.” In other
words, the physical abundance in him forces him to say that. Continue.

298
Reader:
on hearing of the passing of this law, would denounce us for making foolish and
impossible rules, and fill all the place with his outcries; and it was in view of this that I
made the statement that I knew of a device to sescure the permanence of this law when
passed which is at once the easiest of all devices and the hardest.
LS: The easiest what? In other words, the consecration in itself is an easy act of the
legislator, but the enforcement and putting into practice are the most difficult.
Reader:
For while it is very easy to perceive that this is possible, and how it is possible—since we
affirm that this rule, when duly consecrated, will dominate all souls, and cause them to
dread the laws enacted and yield them entire obedience—
LS: Literally, “will enslave every soul.”
Reader:
yet it has now come to this, that men think that, even so, it is unlikely to come about,—
just in the same way as, in the case of the institution of public meals, people refuse to
believe that it is possible for the whole State to be able to continue this practice
constantly; and that, too, in spite of the evidence of facts and the existence of the practice
in your countries; and even there, as applied to women, the practice is regarded as nonnatural. Thus it was that, because of the strength of this unbelief, I said that it is most
difficult to get both these matters permanently legalised. (839a-d)
LS: And Megillus admits that he is quite right. In other words, the introduction of
common meals is easier than what he is planning to do. Now let us see how he goes on,
because he must after all get some solution, some practical solution.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Still, to show that it is not beyond the power of man, but possible, would you like
me to try to state an argument which is not without some plausibility?
[Clin.:] Certainly.
[Ath.:] Would a man be more ready to abstain from sex-indulgence, and to consent to
carry out the law on this matter soberly, if he had his body not ill-trained, but in good
condition, than if he had it in bad condition?
[Clin.:] He would be much more ready if it were not ill-trained.
[Ath.:] Do we not know by report about Iccus of Tarentum, because of his contests at
Olympia and elsewhere,—how, spurred on by ambition and skill, and possessing courage
combined with temperance in his soul, during all the period of his training (as the story
goes) he never touched a woman, nor yet a boy? And the same story is told about Crison
and Astylus and Diopompus and very many others. And yet, Clinias, these men were not
only much worse educated in soul than your citizens and mine, but they also possessed
much more sexual vigour of body.

299
[Clin.:] That this really happened in the case of these athletes is indeed, as you say,
confidently confirmedix by the ancients. (839d-840b)
LS: That is only hearsay. And also you must not forget that he speaks of the acme, of the
peak, of their training. What they did when they were not in training we are not told. That
is very funny. In other words, Plato knows quite well how difficult it is.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, then, if those men had the fortitude to abstain from that which most men
count bliss for the sake of victory in wrestling, running, and the like, shall our boys be
unable to hold out in order to win a much nobler victory—that which is the noblest of all
victories, as we shall tell them from their childhood’s days, charming them into belief, we
hope, by tales and sentences and songs.
[Clin.:] What victory?
[Ath.:] Victory over pleasures,—which if they win, they will live a life of bliss, but if
they lose, the very opposite. Furthermore, will not the dread that this is a thing utterly
unholy give them power to master those impulses which men inferior to themselves have
mastered? (840b-c)
LS: First of all, we need charm—these myths and stories—but also (and that is
emphasized in the Greek, 840c6-7) in addition to that, furthermore: fear. Charms and fear
will be needed. Now this example discussed here is the only concrete example, as far as I
can see, [which] discusses11 the assertion that the noble life is identical with the pleasant
life. One would have to read some very problematical novels but novels on a very high
order in order to understand that problem. In other words, not glorifying vulgar excesses.
Some novels tell this story; for example, Rousseau’s Nouvelle Heloise is such an attempt
to describe that problem of a very deep love of a man and a woman, which is of course
also bodily love. They become unhappy by the fact that they cannot be united. And I
suppose there are other stories with which you are familiar. That is a kind of test case
here. Is it true in this most important case that the moral life, the noble life, is identical
with the pleasant life? The difficulty of making it stick in this crucial case is stated with
the greatest possible clarity by Plato, as you have seen here. But even this is not quite
enough. We need some more help now. Let us read the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Now that we have reached this point in regard to our regulation, but have fallen
into a strait because of our cowardice of the many, I maintain that our regulation on this
head must go forward and proclaim that our citizens must not be worse than fowls and
many other animals which are produced in large broods, and which live chaste and
celibate lives without sexual intercourse until they arrive at the age for breeding; and
when they reach this age they pair off, as instinct moves them, male with female and
female with male; and thereafter they live in a way that is holy and just, remaining
constant to their first contracts of love—

ix

In the Loeb: “confidently affirmed.”

300
LS: You must admit that Plato goes a bit far by ascribing to these birds—pigeons,
probably—a kind of marriage contract, homologia, an agreement. They are protected
against any dangers by their absence of reason. They lack the wits of choice which man
has. And they should be better than beasts, sure[ly].
Reader:
surely our citizens should at least be better than these animals.
LS: But this too is not enough, as the sequel shows.
Reader:
If, however, they become corrupted by most of the other Hellenes or barbarians, through
seeing and hearing that among them the “lawless Love” (as it is called) is of very great
power, and thus become unable to overcome it, then the Law-wardens, acting as
lawgivers, must devise for them a second law.
[Clin.:] What law do you recommend to them to make if that which is now proposed slips
out of their grasp? (840c-841a)
LS: You see, in other words, even this law will not do. The law, the charms, and the fear
will not do; an additional law is needed.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Evidently that law which comes next to it as second.
[Clin.:] What is that?
[Ath.:] One ought to put the force of pleasures as far as possible out of gear, by diverting
its increase and nutriment to another part of the body by means of exercise. This would
come about if indulgence in sexual intercourse were devoid of shamelessness; for if,
owing to shame, people indulged in it but seldom, in consequence of this rare indulgence
they would find it a less tyrannical mistress. Let them, therefore, regard privacy in such
actions—yet not the entire avoidance of such actions—as honourable—sanctioned both
by custom and by unwritten law; and want of privacy as dishonourable. Thus we shall
have a second standard of what is honourable and shameful established by law and
possessing a second degree of rectitude; and those people of depraved character, whom
we describe as “self-inferior,” and who form a single kind, shall be hemmed in by three
kinds of force and compelled to refrain from law-breaking. (841a-c)
LS: Now what is this clever second law, then, if we spell it out?
Student: If you can’t get rid of it altogether, you might as well hide it.
LS: In other words, while the legislator in his wisdom will not forbid sexual relations, he
will forbid public sexual relations, which I believe he does everywhere in the world. It is
no great innovation. But still we have some difficult cases left, and he will dispose of
them in the sequel. This is an extremely funny passage, but I believe one would
misunderstand Plato very grossly if he would believe that he was not aware of this while
writing it. Continue.

301

Reader:
[Ath.:] That of godly fear, and that of love of honour, and that which is desirous of fair
forms of soul, not fair bodies.
LS: Now the three things: piety, love of honor, and what is the third? I think we can call
the third true eros. We have read a passage earlier, 783a, where he distinguished three
things: fear, law, and the true logos. Fear, corresponding here to the fear of the gods; the
law with its praising and blaming, which corresponds to the love of honor; and the true
logos corresponding to the true eros. And now we come to the final statement on this
subject.
Reader:
The things I now mention are, perhaps, like the visionary ideals in a story; yet in very
truth, if only they were realized, they would prove a great blessing in every State.
Possibly, should God so grant, we might forcibly effect one of two things in this matter of
sex relations—
LS: Now two things, two alternatives are stated in the sequel. First:
Reader:
either that no one should venture to touch any of the noble and freeborn save his own
wedded wife, nor sow any unholy and bastard seed in fornication, nor any unnatural and
barren seed in sodomy,—or else we should entirely abolish love for males, and in regard
to that for women, if we enact a law that any man who has intercourse with any woman
save those who have been brought to his house under the sanction of Heaven and holy
marriage, whether purchased or otherwise acquired, if detected in such intercourse by any
man or woman, shall be disqualified from any civic commendation, as being really an
alien,—probably such a law would be approved as right. (841c-e)
LS: Now let us see. What are the alternatives? It is not so easy to figure them out. One is
tougher than the other. I think the key is the beginning of the second alternative: or else to
take away completely sexual relations between males, which would seem to say that the
first did not completely take it away. Then I would understand the first alternative as
follows. Permission for the lighter forms of pederasty and no strict privacy of legal
intercourse with one’s wife, and also no definite penalty. The second, which is the more
political: strict prohibitions against all pederasty, severe prohibitions against any nonprivacy, but apparently intercourse with slave girls would be permitted. At any rate, no
strict monogamy. In other words, I believe he means either strict monogamy plus
indulgence for the lighter form of pederasty, or no strict monogamy plus severe
prohibitions against pederasty.
Student: I don’t understand this about the slave girls.
LS: Well, what are bought women?

302
Student: He says those who have been brought to his house under the sanction of heaven
and holy marriage.
LS: Sure, that sounds as if it were marriage between a citizen and a woman citizen, but
later on he adds this qualification: bought ones.
Student: Does he mean regular concubinage?
LS: But you must not forget that in the first, he speaks also [of the proviso] that he
mustn’t touch any freeborn. What about the non-freeborn? That is omitted. In other
words, it boils down in the end to what is more or less the common practice of
mankind—practice, I am not speaking of the laws. That is to say, the legislator cannot
enforce completely the laws regarding these matters, and especially among unmarried
people. You must not forget that. Men have in former ages been more indulgent to men,
[to] the escapades of men than to escapades of women, married women, for the obvious
reason that the inheritance is much more affected by an adultery of the wife than by an
adultery of the man.
Student: I don’t understand the relation between two alternatives you sketched above.
LS: Well, I think the key is given in this strange passage, 776a to b, when he speaks
about what the newlyweds do. They go to that country place because they shouldn’t be all
the time with the mothers-in-law and fathers-in-law; familiarity produces, not necessarily
contempt, but friction and satiety. And now the question was raised already at that time:
What about the married people themselves? The honeymoon doesn’t last forever. And
therefore, if that is so, then there must be some outlet for what cannot be satisfied by a
permanent relation like that of marriage.
Student: Well, it seems to follow in the first case, but in the case of no strict monogamy
then no pederasty, that seems to . . .
LS: Sure, because the outlet exists then elsewhere. I’m sorry that I have to speak about
these unsavory subjects, but I think that is the most important theme of the eighth book.
Incidentally, that raises this question, whether in studying the Laws—where Plato was
compelled by his self-imposed task to sketch a code and had to bring in all kinds of
things which are of no interest to anyone except to the people who are so unfortunate as
to deal with them, e.g., how the water should be arranged between the farms and this kind
of thing—[whether and] how one could externally distinguish these dull but necessary
parts from the interesting parts. And I wonder whether the mere distinction between the
more dialogical parts and the strictly monological parts would not be of some help. So in
other words, as long as such things of a purely technical nature are discussed, the
Athenian can go on and on and on, that is so. But in the moment the interesting human
problems come up, a dialogue emerges. I do not know whether this would work
universally but it would certainly be worthwhile. But we cannot completely dismiss the
immensely important practical subject discussed at the last section of the book, man’s
means of livelihood.

303

Now the general notion is not very difficult. The citizens have to be farmers—of course
not working it themselves; they have slaves. Craftsmen as well as traders have to be
foreigners or resident aliens, and no resident alien has a right to, say, stay on indefinitely.
There is a maximum time. What was it? Twenty years. And if he is born in the country
the twenty years begin to count when he is fifteen. But he may persuade the authorities
that he should be permitted to stay on. If he is a particularly valuable man, they would
want to keep him. In 846d there is one passage which I think we should read, page 183,
beginning of paragraph.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Moreover, for craftsmen we ought to make regulations in this wise. First, no
resident citizen shall be numbered among those who engage in technical crafts, nor any
servant of a resident. (846d)
LS: I think we leave it at that: the perfect prohibition against citizens having anything to
do with a craft. That is also Aristotle’s point of view, by the way. When you read the
third book of the Politics, he comes out with the same proposition. I believe these were
the most important, or the most striking, parts of the eighth book. There may be quite a
few which we missed, naturally. But I think one can say, subject to revision on the basis
of more careful reading, that just as fear was the great theme underlying the seventh
book, eros is the great theme of the eighth book, by which I do not mean that it accounts
for everything. For example, the subject of livelihood has importance in its own right, but
it is also a relatively uninteresting subject because the solution, while being very
paradoxical to us—a citizen body consisting only of farmers—was not paradoxical at all
in classical antiquity. It was characteristic of the aristocratic city. As Aristotle says in the
third book, democracy permits all occupations to have a share in the polis; the oligarchic
makes it dependent on wealth, so that a wealthy craftsman will have full citizenship
rights: by working hard as a blacksmith or whatever it may be, he could acquire full
citizenship rights. And aristocracy would exclude these professions regardless of how
wealthy the men are, the notion being that farming—of course not if you do the farming
yourself, then you are occupied the whole day, especially prior to tractors and such
devices, or [living as] a kind of squire, not very rich, but a kind of squire’s life; the notion
was that in this activity you are truly free, because you do not depend for your livelihood
on other human beings. You live on nature; you don’t live by virtue of any exchange.
You grow what you need yourself; the surplus, of course, you exchange, but the
exchange is not the basis of your existence. You do not work for the market, whereas not
only the trader but the craftsman works for the market and therefore depends essentially
on other human beings. This, incidentally, is the reason why Aristotle thinks that the
robber (the pirate, if you prefer) is in a way noble, because he doesn’t ask other people, as
we all know. But to ask someone and to be obliging to someone else merely with a view
to one’s livelihood, as both the trader and the craftsman would—they depend on their
customers—is degrading. The farmer as farmer doesn’t have to do it: he is master in his
own house. That is the simple notion which played such a role and [of] which, I think,
you find traces here and there even in the modern world, and even in a highly
technological world like the United States. Because there is really something in the nature

304
of these things which confirms that—by which I do not recommend a relapse into
exploded principles.

1

Deleted “the.”
Moved “death.”
3
Moved “life.”
4
Deleted “to.”
5
Deleted “poetical.”
6
Deleted “than.”
7
Deleted “the.”
8
Deleted “it is”
9
Deleted “something.”
10
Deleted “The Banquet.”
11
Deleted “of.”
2

305
Session 12: February 24, 1959
Leo Strauss: What I like particularly is that you tried to understand the reasons not stated
by Plato [for] why he makes different provisions for different crimes—and one has of
course to think of it. i You didn’t do it in all cases; that would have led you too far. But I
believe the funny examples which you gave would on reflection show, however mad it
may be, that this madness has method. For example, that assault of the father by the child
is much severer than the other way ’round; and the analogy of the slave would be
helpful—you know, you have to think of these seven kinds of titles to rule of the fourth
book, where the master and the parents and so on come in, and whoever is higher is more
protected. That is clear.
And the explanations you suggested, in the cases where you did, were sensible. You also
became aware of the articulation of the book,ii although this perhaps could be stated more
clearly. But I confess that the difficulties are very great. Only one point I didn’t
understand: the suggestion regarding the Athenian Stranger and this particular
anonymity. What did you say?
Student: I didn’t want to press that thing too far, but one of the things I have been
wondering about is that in this case you have a Platonic dialogue in which Socrates is not
mentioned, and I think this is the only dialogue where he is not included.
LS: Yes, and where the identity is wholly obscure.
Student: And in my own impression I would wonder exactly why. I would assume that
this wouldn’t be accidental, since all the other works were there.
LS: And what was your suggestion?
Student: Perhaps that it had something at least to do with the question of obedience in
the book. In other words, the other dialogues, in which Socrates is involved, are those
which go at the main principles; for example, the Republic and the principle of justice.
While this one, as they mention earlier, is a book which would have to do with certain
things which are in a sense ignoble. Assuming that—
LS: Well, a lower level of the laws, that is sure, compared with the Republic. There is no
question about that. But it is of course not universally true because Socrates preaches
obedience, for example, in the Crito as well. And until further notice I still believe that
my suggestion is preferable, namely, that this dialogue shows what Socrates would have
done if he had accepted Crito’s advice to run away from prison. He would not have gone
to Thessaly, but he would have gone to Crete and would have provided the Cretans with
the blessings of Athenian civilization. That is a purely “iffy” thing, because he did stay in
i

Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.
ii
That is, book 9.

306
Athens and accepted capital punishment, and therefore one would have to find out the
reason underlying this choice. Why did he prefer death in Athens to civilizing Crete? And
that is a long question, but I believe a question that can be rationally discussed. If
Socrates had been forty instead of seventy he might have chosen that, because his old age
is one reason why he refuses to accept Crito’s advice. That is an obvious point.
But to come back to the more general point. The articulation of the book, with which I
can begin, is this. First, one can say, the three greatest crimes—at least they are crimes
against the city as a whole: temple robbing or sacrilege in general; dissolution of the
established regime; and treason. That is the first section, and then there follows another
section, the importance of which you have clearly seen, and which I would say deals with
the whole problem of punishment. You did not bring out clearly enough, or rather you
didn’t bring out at all, what the precise issue regarding punishment is from the point of
view of the Stranger. In any penal code you must make a distinction between voluntary
and involuntary damages, let me say voluntary and involuntary crimes. And the thesis of
the Athenian Stranger is what, to begin with?
Student: To begin with, it is that all crimes that are done are involuntary.
LS: Yes, sure. So in other words, since virtue is knowledge, all crimes are involuntary.
And that makes impossible any sensible code. That is the beginning of this discussion.
That is the most important part of the book. I would agree with that. Then the third
subject is homicide, which is also dealt with at very great length, and the somewhat
shorter [treatment of] assault and battery. So the most blood-curdling crimes are
discussed in book 9. Theft is alluded to but not discussed; that comes later. That the
examples are funny—for example, that of the beast and the brick is quite true, and other
examples are also funny, as we shall see—that of course also throws further light on the
great problem of penal justice. We can perhaps clear this up a bit better later on when we
turn to the details. Now let us begin at the beginning (854d5el, page 202 in Loeb). Read
that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “Whosoever is caught robbing a temple, if he be a foreigner or a slave, his curse
shall be branded on his forehead and on his hands, and he shall be scourged with so many
stripes as the judges decree, and he shall be cast out naked beyond the borders of the
country; for, after paying this penalty, he might perchance be disciplined into a better life.
For no penalty that is legally imposed aims at evil but it effects, as a rule, one or other of
two results,—it makes the person who suffers it either better or less bad.” (854d-e)
LS: Let us stop here for one moment. This is the first explicit statement about the
purpose of punishment. But this is clearly incomplete. It makes him better or it makes
him less bad. You can reduce it to one simple item. There is another famous purpose of
law which is absent. What is that?
Student: Aren’t there several?

307
LS: All right.
Student: The retributive aspect?
LS: That is not so important from Plato’s point of view. The simple Platonic formula is
improvement and deterrence. The deterring is not here. Now why can he be silent about
it? Why can he neglect it completely? Well, let us read the immediate sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “But if any citizen is ever convicted of such an act,—that is, of committing some
great and infamous wrong against gods, parents, or State—the judge shall regard him as
already incurable, reckoning that, in spite of all the training and nurture he has had from
infancy, he has not refrained from the worst iniquity. For him the penalty is death, the
least of evils; and, moreover, by serving as an example, he will benefit others, when
himself disgraced and removed from sight beyond the borders of the country—” (854e855a)
LS: In other words, he seems to say here this: Only [with] capital punishment, which of
course cannot have an improving effect as far as the fellow to be killed is concerned, only
in that case does he consider the deterring effect. But is it not also possible to say this—I
don’t know whether I can state it clearly enough: You punish a man; he becomes less bad
and, as it were, he becomes also less contagious as far as criminality is concerned. Is this
not the deterring effect implied? I wonder. Certainly it is true that the reference to
improvement is impossible in the case of capital punishment. That much is clear.
Now in the sequel he turns to the crime against the established regime. And here . . .
Student: Could I ask a question? Punishment itself is no longer a deterrent; it is the threat
of punishment which is the deterrent, and the threat is written into the law.
LS: Yes, but there is this difficulty: if the threat never becomes actual, if the punishment
never takes place . . .
Student: Do you mean exemplary sort of punishment?
LS: No, I mean this. If you say the threat of punishment, what do you mean by that? The
punishment must take place, of course, in other cases. And then the threat of punishment
as far as I am concerned, if I plan a crime. Surely. In the moment I plan, I am not yet
guilty in a legal sense. So it is the punishment, I would say, which has the deterrent
effect. What are you driving at with your distinction?
Student: The law contains the threat of punishment, not the actual punishment. And one
would be hesitant to do the act if he knew that there was the condition of the punishment
to become actual.

308
LS: But is not that what the law clearly says: if you do that and that, you will be punished
in that and that manner? I don’t see the usefulness of the distinction between punishment
and threat of punishment. It appears to me as an unnecessary subtlety. Of course, in my
planning or considering a crime, punishment enters—not as the fact of my punishment,
which would be wholly out of place since I am not yet guilty—[but] only as the threat of
punishment. But it is the punishment actually practiced by my society in many cases
which I have seen which actually deters me.
Student: I’m not sure. But doesn’t a deterrent by its very nature refer to the future? You
can’t speak about deterrent here and now because as soon as the deterrent is used it is no
longer a deterrent; it is something else.
LS: But the question is whether it is deterring if it is never actually put into practice.
Student: To use it in this respect, if it is put in practice it might still remain a deterrent
for others but it would not be a deterrent for the person on whom it is being used.
LS: No, no. But prior to the crime.
Student: Prior to the crime is what I am talking about. It then exists in law; it doesn’t
exist in being, or however you want to call it.
LS: Yes, but you must not underestimate the fact that it exists not merely on the statute
book or as a threat but in actual practice as far as others are concerned. There is a danger
of dissolving the harshness and massivity of punishment by psychological considerations.
I’m a bit afraid of that. And if I don’t see a clear reason why this distinction is really
necessary to make, I would be hesitant to accept it. That is my motive.
Now we then turn to the question of treason against the established order, and there the
statements are quite clear. Not only these conspirators are punishable but also the
magistrates, who not only out of cowardice fail to act but 1 who [also] are not watchful
enough to observe it. I think that is a very sensible point. And [this law], if enforceable,
goes very much to strengthen the back of the government in existence. That in such
matters carelessness cannot be tolerated. That is very strong. But then we have a very
strange transition in the end of 856e, page 211 to. Will you read that?
Reader:
[Ath.:] Moreover, a third general law shall be laid down, dealing with the judges to be
employed and the manner of the trials, in cases where one man prosecutes another on a
charge of treason—
LS: Now the third point is then really treason, after sacrilege and crimes against the
established regime.
Reader:

309
and concerning the offspring, likewise, whether they are to remain in their country or be
expelled, this one law shall apply to the three cases of the traitor, the temple-robber, and
the man who wrecks the State laws by violence. For the thief also, whether he steals a
great thing or a small, one law and one legal penalty shall be enacted for all alike: first, he
must pay twice the value of the stolen article, if he loses his case and possesses enough
property over and above his allotment wherewith to pay; but if not, he must be put in
prison until either he has paid the sum or has been let off by the prosecutor. And if a man
be cast in a suit for theft from the State, on obtaining pardon from the State, or after
payment of double the sum stolen, he shall be let out of prison.
[Clin.:] How comes it, Stranger, that we are ruling that it makes no difference to the thief
whether the thing he steals be great or small, and whether the place it is stolen from be
holy or unhallowed, or whatever other differences may exist in the manner of a theft;
whereas the lawgiver ought to suit the punishment to the crime by inflicting dissimilar
penalties in these varying cases?
[Ath.:] Well said, Clinias! You have collided with me when I was going, as it were, full
steam ahead, and so have woken me up. You have reminded me of a previous reflection
of mine, how that none of the attempts hitherto made at legislation have ever been carried
out rightly—as in fact we may infer from the instance before us. (856e-857c)
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. Now that is, I think, a very rare case, if not the unique
case, that the Athenian reacts to criticism of the Cretan in this way, i.e., that you have
caught me dozing. What happened? That one must understand. Now the first difficulty, I
believe, is created by the question of theft itself, which is brought in here and then
completely dropped for the rest of the book. Perhaps theft means something more than
what it appears [to] at first glance. Now the Greek word for stealing, kleptein, has a
broader meaning than the English word. Primarily of course it means to steal, but it
means also to do something secretive, to do something while escaping notice. For
example, Socrates in some dialogues, e.g., the first book of the Republic, where
Thrasymachus says once to Socrates: You steal by words, by speeches. To do something
in a deceptive manner. Now if you turn back to the first law which we read, let us look at
that again. You remember that, about the temple robber? Whoever will be caught while
he is robbing temples. Now this is the most basic principle of all penal law: that not the
crime is punished but the discovered crime. The legislator in his wisdom, of course, never
says so except here in this particular case where Plato wants to make it clear. Whoever
steals money from a public treasury and is caught will be . . . otherwise it would be a
kind of travesty of law, a kind of admonition to future Mr. Hodgesiii not to be caught; and
therefore it is preposterous. But it is a very important thing, and it shows a certain
fundamental and inevitable defect of all penal justice: that it is inflicted only on those
who are caught and not on those who deserve it, to say nothing of the difficulty arising
from the famous use of evidence. If someone is found guilty by virtue of certain rules of
evidence, then he is guilty in the eyes of the law, but he may be perfectly innocent. But
let us take this first and simple point: that one has to be caught in order to be punished.
Now since the penal law never says that, except in this particular section of Plato, the law
which says [that] he who does this and this will be punished in this and this way is
iii

The identity of Mr. Hodge or Hodges is unknown.

310
untrue, it omits the crucial condition. Now from this point of view, all penal laws are
untruths because, to repeat, they omit the crucial condition of discovery.
Student: Later on in the book there is an example of a law in which someone is not
caught, and therefore the lawgiver—I think it was a killing—then explains the divine
penalties for this and that the person must abstain from the temples and so forth. But if
you go on, once this is announced and you would have a particular citizen who would
abstain from all these things, it would single him out as the person who is guilty.
LS: Sure. It would mean to disregard the equivalent of the Fifth Amendment available at
that time. Sure. But you see immediately what a great problem that is if the penal law as
such is necessarily based on a noble untruth, by omitting the qualification “if he is
caught.” There is a beautiful example of that in Xenophon somewhere; I don’t remember
it right now, but a very charming example of the omission of this condition. But at any
rate, we see that Plato was aware of it.
Student: I hate to sound ridiculous, but this whole thing sounds kind of spurious. What
you are claiming when you say penal law is untrue or based on a noble lie is the fact that
it is impossible. But couldn’t the same argument work as regards the best regime is
untrue, because this too is impossible?
LS: Sure, therefore he calls it a mistreatment. That is no objection whatever because it
always boils down to this: that these social matters (let us use this wide term) are
distinguished from the subhuman as well as from the superhuman world by a peculiar
twilight character in which they exist. They are shot through with opinion. And that is in
one respect higher than the subhuman thing where opinion doesn’t enter, but it is also,
from another point of view, a sign of a defect: that this is not the element of truth in
which they live. And that would show in various ways: in false generalities, where
qualifications would be necessary, and whatever you take.
Student: Well, I hate to complain, as Plato does in book 10, that he is going to push you
out of the limits of the political, but it seems to me that this presupposes a whole
conception of truth which somehow seems to be untrue.
LS: I know what you mean.
Student: The equation of truth with absolute unchangeability for instance, or something
like that.
LS: We have discussed this in the case of the Minos. Plato is not guilty of that, I believe,
as I showed when we read the Minos, where he shows that changeability belongs
essentially to [a] certain subject matter; therefore that is a wrong notion.
Student: Okay. And if it belongs essentially to penal law to have existential reference to
those who are caught only, then this is the truth of penal law.

311
LS: Sure. But still, look at it dispassionately, and then you have this rule: here the actual
theft and here the punishment applied to it. And the legislator, regardless of what a very
clever legislator might do, means that he who commits these and these acts will be
punished with these and these deprivations, to use Mr. Lasswell’s term.iv That is the
meaning. And yet a moment’s reflection shows us, on the basis of the most common
experience, that this consequence follows only if the crime is discovered. The mere
committing of the crime is not sufficient, and therefore, if we now say, “All right, let us
be exact, let us say precisely what is meant,” then we say, “If he commits this and this
crime and he is discovered, then he will be punished.” And we see immediately that it
reads like a parody on penal justice and therefore the legislators in their wisdom do not
state the penal law in this language. You can say it is inevitable, surely. There is no way
out of that. One cannot possibly—
Student: Well, put it this way. It seems to be accidental to penal law—the fact that it has
existential reference only to those who get caught. I mean the penal law truly intends that
everyone who does the act get punished.
LS: If I accept for one moment your point of view, I would say an accidental thing which
is universal is not a mere accident. It has to do with the essential limitations of human
knowledge. Well, fundamentally we are discussing always the same problem.
This strange event here, that the Athenian is caught napping or at least pretends to be
caught napping, has also to do with something else, because this theft business, this being
caught business, is only one element of the great problem of penal law. And the Athenian
somehow anticipates the great difficulty, the fundamental problem of punishment, and
therefore he talks in a very inadequate way on the crime at hand, namely, theft. And so he
is caught napping. This is, in other words, a transition to the discussion of the basic
problem of punishment. Now I think we continue reading where we left off, 857c,
middle.
Reader:
[Ath.:] What do I mean to imply by this remark? It was no bad comparison we made
when we compared all existing legislation to the doctoring of slaves by slaves. For one
should carefully notice this, that if any of the doctors who practice medicine by purely
empirical methods, devoid of theory, were to come upon a free-born doctor conversing
with a free-born patient, and using arguments, much as a philosopher would—
LS: Here is the first time the word philosophy occurs in the Laws. Literally it is the verb
philosophizing which occurs. That is a big event.
Reader:
dealing with the course of the ailment from its origin and surveying the natural
constitution of the human body,—he would at once break out into a roar of laughter, and
the language he would use would be none other than that which always comes ready to
the tongue of most so-called “doctors”: “You fool,” he would say, “you are not doctoring
iv

See Harold Lasswell, Power and Personality (1962).

312
your patient, but schooling him, so to say, as though what he wanted was to be made, not
a sound man, but a doctor.”
[Clin.:] And in saying so, would he not be right?
[Ath.:] Possibly, provided that he should also take the view that the man who treats of
laws in the way that we are now doing is schooling the citizens rather than legislating.
Would he not seem to be right in saying that too?
[Clin.:] Probably. (857c-e)
LS: Now let us stop here for one moment. That is really a great event, that in a book of
such a length and written by such an author, the word “philosophy” is studiously avoided
in the bulk of the work. I do not remember whether it occurs at all in the sequel. I
deliberately did not look it up in a dictionary in order to have the pleasure of discovering
it for myself. That is the first time, and it occurs when the discussion [of] punishment
comes up, [when] the fundamental problem of punishment comes up. And he uses the
analogy of a physician. In other words, he makes clear what a philosopher is by the
analogy of a physician. And what does the true physician do? He ascends to studying the
whole nature of the body. In other words, he does not merely look at the tongue and
prescribe something to get the defect away; he looks at the whole body and studies the
whole body: anatomy, physiology and what have you. Similarly, the philosopher, the
physician of the soul, would study the whole nature of the souls. The plural is intentional,
because he has also to consider the various types—you remember: the courageous, the
modest, and the other types which have to be considered. Furthermore, the introduction
of the term “philosophy” is here linked up with the opposition between educating and not
merely punishing, but legislating. Educating is something much more profound and much
more serious than mere[ly] legislating. But the distinction is made with special regard to
the problem of punishment. What is preparing is the thesis that punishment, to be
rational, would have to be merely educative. And that of course is absolutely impossible.
You need capital punishment, that was at least Plato’s opinion. You need even such
strange things as punishing a brick or a horse, beings which cannot be educated in any
proper sense, and some intermediate cases which are also very interesting and, viewed in
the Platonic perspective, very funny. So let us see what we learn about punishment in the
sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] How fortunate we are in the conclusion we have now come to!
[Clin.:] What conclusion?
LS: That is not necessarily translated that way. “How fortunate are we in the present, the
present situation.” That does not necessarily refer to the present conclusion but the whole
situation as will appear from the sequel.
Reader:
[Ath.:] This,—that there is no need to legislate, but only to become students ourselves,
and endeavor to discern in regard to every polity how the best form might come about,
and how that which is the least elaborate possible.

313
LS: That is badly translated: “and the most necessary.” The best and the most necessary.
These are two entirely different considerations. The best and the most urgent; you could
also put it this way.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Moreover, we are now allowed, as it seems, to study, if we choose, the best form
of legislation, or, if we choose, the least elaborate. So let us make our choice between
these two—the least necessary.v (857e-858a)
LS: No, no. “The most necessary.” More literally: to look at the best, and if we choose, to
look at the most necessary regarding laws. We may choose either one, whatever we
prefer. Now let us stop here. Now this is one of the clearest Platonic passages indicating
Plato’s or the Athenian Stranger’s own position. He is not a legislator—Clinias is a
legislator to some extent, but not he: he is a teacher of legislators. Now as a teacher of
legislators, he has a much greater freedom than any legislator has. He can consider and
must consider all fundamental alternatives, whereas for the legislator all alternatives are
excluded by the very fact that he is a legislator for this society under these conditions,
and these alternatives are indicated here by the two extremes: the best and the most
urgent, because no one in his senses would choose something bad and unnecessary. The
lowest level is the most necessary, the highest is the best. And there is an infinite variety
in between. But if we indicate the ceiling and the flooring we do not have to enumerate
the characteristic intermediate cases. Now let us go on and read the next passage.
Reader:
[Clin.:] The choice we propose, Stranger, is an absurd one: we should be acting like
legislators who were driven by some overpowering necessity to pass laws on the spot,
because it is impossible for them to do so on the morrow. But for us (if Heaven will) it is
quite possible to do as bricklayers do, or men starting on any other kind of
construction,—that is, to collect material piecemeal, from which we may select what is
suitable for the edifice we intend to build, and, what is more, select it at our leisure. Let
us assume, then, that we are not now building under compulsion, but that we are still at
leisure, and engaged partly in collecting material and partly in putting it together; so that
we may rightly say that our laws are being in part already erected and in part collected.
(858b-c)
LS: Here is a very beautiful passage because it shows how philosophy comes to sight to a
man who is previously completely unaware of it. But here he begins to understand this
difference of people who have this leisure to choose, and he uses a very homely example
out of the only sphere he knows, namely, brick layers, people who are still in the stage
where they can choose and people who are under compulsion so that they have no
freedom to consider alternatives. Now continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] We have in our States not only the writings and written speeches of man other
people, but also the writings—
v

The words “least necessary” do not appear in the text; the passage ends “between these two.”

314

LS: No, I believe you omitted a speech, a very important speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In this way, Clinias, our survey of laws will at any rate follow nature’s course
more closely.
LS: Our synopsis, our comprehensive consideration of the laws will be to a higher degree
according to nature; namely, it will consider the rank of the possibilities and not be
accidentally limited to what is imposed on us now by the circumstances. Continue.
Reader:
Now let us consider, I adjure you, the following point about legislators. (858a-c)
LS: “I adjure,” he says? In the Greek, it is “by the gods.” That is the first time that our
Athenian Stranger swears. That is also characteristic of the book: extreme scarcity of
reference to philosophy and extreme scarcity of oaths. I believe it is not an accident that
the Athenian swears for the first time after he has referred to philosophy, but to discuss
that would lead us very far. Now let us read the sequel.
Reader:
We have in our States not only the writings and written—
LS: We don’t have to read that, because there are so many other important things. I will
summarize it as follows. The legislator ought to be the teacher of all other writers,
because qua legislator he is a writer. Written laws. And he ought to be the authority for
all other writers. Since he is the teacher of all other writers, he must educate and not
merely command like a tyrant. We draw one conclusion here. The writers of whom he
speaks are also the poets: Homer and Tyrtaeus are mentioned by name. The educating
legislator is surely superior to the poet. The noneducating legislator, that is to say,
practically every legislator, is of course inferior to the poets, to the best poets. Now let us
then read the sequel in 859b (page 219).
Reader:
[Ath.]: First of all, since we have started on it, we must examine closely the law about
temple-robbers and all forms of thieving and wrong-doing; nor should we be vexed by
the fact that, although we enacted some points while legislating, there are some points
still under consideration: for we are in process of becoming lawgivers, and may perhaps
become so, but we are not lawgivers as yet. (859b-c)
LS: That is a very important statement. Clinias is a man probably in the high sixties,
certainly an old man. They are not yet legislators. In the vulgar sense they would be
legislators. But the Athenian teaches them to become legislators, and for this purpose he
has to go into the kind of question which the vulgar legislator would never go into.

315
Now in the sequel he takes up this very great question to which I have referred more than
once, and that is the problem of the relation of the noble and the just. I repeat some things
which I have said very often. The Greeks do not have a word for what we would call the
moral. They call that the noble and the just. The good falls also under it, but the good
does not necessarily have this moral connotation—good can also simply mean useful and
so on. But what we understand by moral is called by the Greeks the noble and the just.
And these two things are closely akin but they are not identical, and there are cases in
which something is clearly just without being noble. And it is a very difficult discussion
whether the opposite might not be true, whether there might not be something noble
without being just. You remember the case of this man who is noble, when he says
goodness is defined by control of the passions regardless of whether something happens
to another fellow. Do you remember that? We come to that passage later. So that would
perhaps be a case of a man who is noble and not just. That might happen. But that is
much too subtle for our present purposes. The simple case is something which is just
without being noble, and the clearest case is punishment, undergoing punishment. If you
deserve it, it is clearly just but it is not noble. No one is admired for undergoing
punishment. Or take a more simple example: paying one’s debts is just; it is not noble.
No one is admired. They do not say: Look at this marvelous man; he paid his debts,
whereas if a man, in action especially, does something beyond the call of duty, of course
what he did is just but it is more than just: it is noble. This distinction, I think, is
omnipresent in this kind of literature.
Student: What about the case of the person who undergoes his punishment bravely?
LS: That is so low that we . . .
Student: But isn’t there some element . . .
LS: Sure,2 [there is] a difference between the fellow who, when being hanged or before
being drawn and quartered still makes jokes, and the other one who is completely
hysterical.
Student: Or in the case of a man who faces the firing squad without a blindfold.
LS: Yes, sure. They would say it makes a great difference if this, for example, is a
foreign spy, a man spying for his country, then the deed is intrinsically noble and the
deed is just like an action in war. That is a different story. But if he is a common traitor
doing this for money, let us assume, then they would say that that is such a low case that
this distinction doesn’t make any difference. It is at best a very subtle thing about which a
reasonable man wouldn’t care. Surely it makes a difference, but it is not so terribly
important.
Student: This might be something for sociology.

316
LS: Sure, sure, but they deal with all kinds of irrelevancies, so we don’t have to go into
that. So this much is clear. Now let us read perhaps 860b in which this problem is made
clear, page 221.
Reader:
[Ath.:] We laid it down that it is just to put to death the temple-robber and the enemy of
the rightly-enacted laws; and then, when we were minded to enact a host of similar rules,
we held our hand, since we perceived that such rules involve passions infinite both in
number and in magnitude—
LS: “Passion” is not a very good translation. It is literal but not clear, because it means
pathēma—suffering, you could almost say. An action in the strict sense is what a being
does, and a passion is what happens to a being when acted upon. This word is applied, for
example, to the sun and moon as well as to man. An eclipse of the sun is a pathēma of the
sun. So if you understand passion in this broad ontological sense, then you can do it, but
that is not the common understanding. It creates a difficulty.
Reader:
and that, although they are eminently just, they are also eminently unseemly. Thus the
just and the beautiful will seem to us at one moment wholly identical, at another, utterly
opposed, will they not?
[Clin.:] I am afraid so. (860b)
LS: In other words, that is the difficulty: that the most just punishment may very well be
the most degrading. And that there is a difficulty here you see from the following fact,
which only a certain kind of sociology can deny, namely, that while many of us admit
capital punishment, none of these people would wish ever to be an executioner or even to
be present, I believe, so tender have become our nerves. But if you disapprove of capital
punishment, take prison. Who would like to become a prison warden, or still less, to be
one of these guys who has to lock them in and this kind of thing? There is something not
particularly nice about that, let us not fool ourselves, and yet it is necessary. That is one
aspect of the problem of society as such: that it must, for very good and respectable
reasons, establish institutions which are somehow unsavory. And I am speaking now not
of concessions which society makes, e.g., that it tolerates prostitution and this kind of
thing. One could say this latter does not have to be tolerated, but something like prisons
you need. And you see immediately where our liberal friends come in who try to replace
the prison warden and the executioner by the psychiatrist, because a psychiatrist is of
course a perfectly respectable man and his activity is perfectly respectable, and if we
could replace prisons and death chambers by psychiatric wards, that would be a great
progress in humanity.
Well, Plato doesn’t think of psychiatry, but he thinks of someone analogous to the
psychiatrist, namely, of the educator of the soul. What he is driving at ultimately is this:
society would be so infinitely better, it would be humane, just, and noble, there would no
longer by any conflict between the just and the noble if punishment would be reducible to
improvement. Well, let us take this example. Now this fellow is drawn and quartered or

317
whipped or put in jail. This minor difference that they are no longer whipped or drawn
and quartered I dismiss as merely a matter of our nerves; and the degrading things which
happen, that a grown-up man can no longer walk as he wants and can no longer use his
hands, the wrists, and so on. But if this would not be so, there would no longer be a tough
cop but a bright nurse or two nurses, male or female, very tenderly bringing this man into
this office of the psychiatrist. You can see. But we don’t have a psychiatrist in the case of
Plato; we have here a physician of the soul in the Platonic sense, who would talk to that
man and try to bring to light what his problems are and convince him of the absurdity of
what he has been doing. And then in this case punishment would no longer be
punishment, of course, it would be betterment. And then of course this would be
ennobling in itself; the degrading element would cease. That is the problem which Plato
is discussing here, and the unfortunate thing is—as no one knew better than this same
Plato—that this is not sufficient, and therefore we have to swallow the distinction
between the noble and the just. We have to admit this degrading element into society as
something which is going to stay.
Now let us see how this proceeds. The most just punishment may be most degrading.
How to reconcile this with the assertion that the just is in all cases noble? Answer: If
punishment were improvement. But this is not what the Athenian says immediately. I
said this only in order to make you understand the whole problem. The immediate
assertion of the Athenian is that all bad men are involuntarily bad, and therefore the
proper attitude toward criminals is not hatred, revenge, but compassion. But how is this
connected with the broader assertion? If virtue is knowledge, then betterment is education
as distinguished from punishment. That is one line. Now the other line: if goodness is
knowledge, then badness can only be ignorance, and all vice and crime is ignorance. Now
let us see in 860e. There is a sentence we should consider. It occurs in a longer speech of
the Athenian, page 223.
Reader:
[Ath.:] This,—that the unjust man is, indeed, bad, but the bad man is unwillingly bad. But
it is illogical to suppose that a willing deed is done unwillingly—
LS: The Athenian Stranger speaks [in a] much less highfalutin’ [way]. He says, “It
doesn’t make sense.” Why should one say “it is illogical” for “it doesn’t make sense,”
except in order to make the impression that one is more educated than other people?
Reader:
therefore he that commits an unjust act does so unwillingly in the opinion of him who
assumes that injustice is involuntary—a conclusion which I also must now allow; for I
agree that all men do unjust acts unwillingly; so, since I hold this view—and do not share
the opinion of those who, through contentiousness or arrogance, assert that, while there
are some who are unjust against their will, yet there are also many who are unjust
willingly— (860d-e)
LS: That is a gross misunderstanding. The one who sees other fellows say that men are
unjust unwillingly, but they commit unjust acts voluntarily—well, I don’t know what

318
these kind of people were, but the distinction is a very important distinction which
everyone who has read the fifth book of Aristotle’s Ethics would know (and also Plato’s
Gorgias, by the way): that there is a fundamental distinction between an unjust man and a
man committing an unjust act. A man committing an unjust act is therefore not yet an
unjust man. An unjust man is a man who is habitually unjust, so that an unjust man might
commit a just act, of course, and vice versa. This is the distinction he meant. But that I
mention only in passing. In other words, these people say the characters are
involuntary—good, justice, or injustice—but the actions are nevertheless voluntary and
involuntary. What they meant and how they work this out we do not know.
Student: I was wondering, does this not then bring up the whole problem of the justice of
punishment, not only as regards the state or polis but as regards . . .
LS: Surely. But if these considerations are of any weight, then they must compel us to
raise the question of the justice of punishment, surely. Nothing less than that. But we
must see how Plato tries to solve that. Up to now he has not yet even completely stated it.
Student: . . . vi
LS: I do not remember this French novel. You are speaking of Manon Lescaut.vii
I think we could easily visualize this difference between an unjust man and a man
committing an unjust action. It is even thinkable also the other way around, that the
unjust man never commits an unjust action. Think of the second book of Plato’s
Republic—you know, this hypocrite who has the reputation of being a perfectly just man.
He never commits an unjust act and yet he is thoroughly unjust, surely. Now any
somewhat deeper moral reflection would show that the judgment of man on the basis of
mere actions is very insufficient. Today that is so popular that it becomes necessary again
to emphasize that the actions are not so unimportant.
Now I repeat the problem. If virtue is knowledge, if this thesis is adhered to, all vice is
involuntary. Betterment and education in opposition to punishment. But every legislation
presupposes the distinction between voluntary and involuntary crimes. We cannot do
without that. That is the problem which he is trying to solve in the sequel. Now we read
in 861, page 227.
Reader:
[Clin.:] What you say, Stranger, appears to us to be excellent: we ought to do one of two
things,—either not assert that all unjust acts are involuntary, or else make our distinctions
first, then prove the correctness of that assertion.
[Ath.:] Of these alternatives the first is to me quite intolerable—namely, not to assert
what I hold to be the truth,—for that would be neither a lawful thing to do nor a pious.
vi

The transcriber notes: “inaudible question concerning Manon Lescaut.”
Abbé Prévost (Antoine François Prévost), L’histoire du chevalier des Grieux et de Manon
Lescaut (1731).
vii

319
But as to the question how such acts are two-fold,—if the difference does not lie in that
between the voluntary and the involuntary, then we must try to explain it by means of
some other distinction. (861c-d)
LS: Incidentally, let us reflect for one moment on this casual remark here. It wouldn’t be
lawful or pious for me to say what I do not regard as true. What do you say about that? I
think that is very far from being casual because it throws light on the problem under
discussion. We have heard formerly different remarks. Is it not lawful to say things which
one doesn’t believe under certain conditions: the physician to the patient, the wise to the
unwise, parents to children, generals to soldiers? You know the famous Platonic thesis.
Now let us look at these examples. A physician who deceives his patient for the benefit
of his patient: this, I would contend, is the classic case of someone who commits in a way
an injustice knowingly, with his eyes open. The ordinary criminal, according to Socrates,
doesn’t know what he does, meaning he believes in the value of wealth or whatever it
may be and really has no notion of what is choiceworthy and what is not. He is a blind
man. But the philosopher, to take the highest case from Plato’s point of view, if the
philosopher is compelled to say the untruth, then he knows what he is doing. He
voluntarily chooses to do something which, from another point of view which he
understands, is unlawful or even infamous. So the paradox here is that the only fully
responsible criminal would be the philosopher, once you have this dilemma as I have
stated it; the others would be innocent. I don’t regard this as unimportant, but still it is not
developed here.
But now we come back to the immediate subject. How can we introduce a distinction
between voluntary and involuntary crimes although we assert that all crimes are
involuntary? The first step is the distinction between damage and injustice. Someone may
damage another man without an injustice involved. The rule is simple: In the case of a
damage, compensation; in the case of injustice, cure. But no punishment: cure. But what
about that cure? Now the first answer we get is in 862d1, page 231. Let us read that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In this,—[that] whenever any man commits any unjust act, great or small, the law
shall instruct him and absolutely compel him for the future either never willingly to dare
to do such a deed, or else to do it ever so much less often, in addition to paying for the
injury. To effect this, whether by action or speech, by means of pleasures and pains,
honours and dishonours, money-fines and money-gifts, and in general by whatsoever
means one can employ to make men hate injustice and love (or at any rate not hate)
justice,—this is precisely the task of laws most noble.
LS: Let us stop here for a moment. You see, he has already made a grave concession to
the necessities by saying that the law does not merely teach or instruct but also compels,
and the compulsion as such is not necessarily instructing. That should be clear. Let us
read on.
Reader:

320
But for all those whom he perceives to be incurable in respect of these matters, what
penalty shall the lawgiver enact, and what law? The lawgiver will realise that in all such
cases not only is it better for the sinners themselves to live no longer, but also that they
will prove of a double benefit to others by quitting life—since they will both serve as a
warning to the rest not to act unjustly, and also rid the State of wicked men,—and thus he
will of necessity inflict death as the chastisement for their sins, in cases of this kind, and
of this kind only. (862d-863a)
LS: In other words, if punishment is to be educative, then capital punishment must be
limited only to the incurable. All right, that is plausible. We want to cure, not to punish.
But there are cases in which cure is impossible and something must be done, however,
because that fellow is a public menace. Answer: capital punishment. Now here you have
an interesting guidepost for the analysis of all the following laws. Do we deal in all these
cases with incurables? Take the example of the son striking his father once. Capital
punishment. But how do you know that he is not curable if you would take him to that
better psychiatrist, Socrates? And he would tell him “Look,” and after a long
conversation—he would have to stay with Socrates for a few months—he would see that
is really impossible. And if his father is excruciating and difficult, then he should leave
the house for the time being and so on, but under no circumstances strike him. That is all
right. But Plato later on does not limit capital punishment to incurables. Even the
deliberate murderer of his fellow citizens who did it once: you have no certainty that he is
incurable. You have no certainty, and yet the law regards him as incurable. You see what
happens: one of these typically Platonic cases of dilution, as I call it. A rational principle
is clearly stated, and then on the basis of some other principle, not strictly speaking true
but3 [originating in opinion], this is modified. And what is the modifier? What is the
opinion-based modifying principle which justifies this kind of capital punishment which
would not be justified on this basis, i.e., that the fellow is incurable? Namely, that the
action is in itself so atrocious that it cannot be forgiven; nothing less than death will do to
expiate it. That is the subject which will come up later. But we still have to follow Plato’s
argument as far as possible regarding the distinction to be made in order to justify the
introduction of the distinction between involuntary and voluntary crimes.
Now the first distinction which he makes in the immediate sequel is that between three
causes of crime: thymos (spiritedness, passion, anger) is one; pleasure is the other; and
the third is ignorance.viii
Student: Well, if all crime is committed because of ignorance only—
LS: No, that he denies.
Student: Whether voluntary or involuntary depends on how you regard it.
LS: Well, you have already stated the grave step which Plato has taken.
Student: And he is giving other reasons here for the possibility?
viii

There was a break in the tape at this point.

321

LS: By introducing three causes, one of which is ignorance, he has already introduced the
principle of distinction. Some crimes are not caused by ignorance but by passion and
pleasure. And we are back to common sense.
Student: But passion and pleasure are here regarded as a form of ignorance. That is, they
are in possession of a person who does not understand that he must always look to the
good and have his soul ruled by reason. So the fact that I have passion and receive
pleasure is itself ignorance.
LS: That is what Plato and Socrates surely meant. But the question is whether this is not
too radical a consideration to live on in society. Take the other theses of Socrates which
are so well known, the Stoic popular formulations, although they are primarily Socrates’s
formulation: that only the wise man is virtuous, is a king, is a true poet, the true general.
You can all prove this easily. Now it would be absolutely hopeless to get the appointment
of any general on the ground that he is a wise man. Something in society, which we must
try to lay our hands on, simply condemns this assertion to practical absurdity. Plato had a
strong sense of the comical character of these matters, but he was not so simple a man
[as] to believe that the more comical character of the proposition shows it to be absurd.
There is something in that. But we have to find out what is that x characteristic of society
which condemns these perfectly sensible propositions to practical absurdity. And what
Plato has in mind is something like this, which I have said before and which I can repeat
again: there is the polis [LS draws on the blackboard], but the polis has a hole. It is a
cave. The true life of man is above that, the philosophic life. And all the solutions to the
human problem are found here, not here. These are all rough and ready solutions for
practical purposes which do not [with]stand a close analysis. Theoretically, the problem
is this: What is that ceiling beyond which you cannot go if you want to remain political?
Or still more precisely stated: What are the basic opinions which constitute the polis as
polis? From Plato’s point of view they can only be opinions, they can never be
knowledge.
Now this is the problem which Plato discusses most clearly in the Republic in the section
on the noble lie, where he gives two principles which are essential to the polis as polis.
The first is the principle that the fraternity is the fraternity only of fellow citizens as
distinguished from the human race. In other words, the political society must regard itself
as natural and in no way dependent on convention, because once you regard it as
arbitrary, for example, the right of secession—the practical problem of the right of
secession. That is ruled out only if you regard it as a natural unity; otherwise the question
of the secession of a state, of a permanent depatriation, is always possible. And the
second equally important premise is the identification of the social hierarchy with the
natural hierarchy. If that identification is not done, chaos follows. If the people in control,
the ruling people, the government, are not regarded as deserving to govern, that is
morally an act of high treason, although it may be perfectly reasonable under given
conditions.

322
There are other formulas which a man like Plato suggested in other places, but what he
says is [that] there are certain opinions beyond which you cannot go as long as you want
to be political. On a more simple level, the level of mere practice without getting into the
theoretical considerations, you see it as follows, for example, when you have a political
debate. All debates of any consequence are based on one simple principle: the sacredness
of the constitution. In the moment a proposal implies the questioning of that, you are no
longer [in the realm of the] political. And it is the sign of a chaotic state, a decaying state,
that propositions including the abolition of the constitution can be entertained. That state
is unwholesome; it is decaying.
Student: In that case, then, Plato is introducing for the polis a set of instrumental ethics
and value and knowledge, and is in a sense bringing on the problem which we face now
of the regarding of ethics and knowledge as purely instrumental and not as . . .
LS: Not quite. Plato is not a relativist; that is out of the question. Plato is only a very
prudent and very broad man, whereas a relativist by definition is the opposite. But how
shall I state it? This is a problem we have discussed all the time. I will now translate this
into the language of the Laws, if I may do that. This is nous [LS draws on the
blackboard], the mind, intelligence; this is nomos at its best. In other words, if you
analyze the law at its best, you also will arrive at certain fundamental premises,
fundamental propositions, which also are not true. Let me take this example. Whoever
commits a certain crime will be punished: [that] is such an opinion by which the city
stands and falls, and yet it is demonstrably untrue. And there are others. So the distinction
between nous and nomos is inevitable, and yet practically, a society of any decency lives
on a wise blindness to the distinction. One identifies for practical purposes the law in
general—not necessarily each individual provision—with the edict of pure reason itself.
That is so. There is no alternative. It is inconvenient, inelegant, but you cannot expect
everywhere elegance, that is unreasonable.
Now as for relativism there is none. Why? In the first place, the highest standard, virtue
in itself according to nature, is unchangeable. Secondly, even the principles of the
dilution are also unchangeable. Some relatively minor matters, for example, should you
sacrifice this goat or four lambs, are determined by Delphi: the legislator can’t decide it
and must not decide it. And other little things. But the main points, even the main untrue
thoughts, are not arbitrary. They all keep at least within a certain frame. There is no
relativism. Relativism is based on the fact that it forgets its own principle, one could say.
The only thing which is of interest in relativism, I believe, is the belief which it somehow
transmits that reason and the exercise of reason, science, is the noblest activity of man.
They don’t say that anymore, but somehow they believe in that nevertheless, at least the
more thoughtful ones. And that they cannot say, that which they mean all the time. I have
found another statement to this effect in one of these many writers. In other words, they
cease to think about it; Plato did not. And I don’t believe that relativism is in any way a
possible position, because then relativism itself, as a universal assertion . . . you see? It
ascribes the highest dignity to its own position and therefore to the attitude, the mental
attitude, which goes together with this position. But I forgot about you.

323
Student: Well, I don’t know whether you want to pursue these general questions at all.
LS: No, I shouldn’t have done so. It was really unfair to you that I did. But as you see,
one cannot always be just. But I will give you an opportunity at the earliest possible time.
Now let us continue. So we solved the question [of] how Plato reintroduces the
distinction between voluntary and involuntary crimes, although he is prohibited by his
principles to do so. He simply makes this concession by saying that there is such a thing
as ignorance as distinguished from passion or rage on the one hand, and pleasure on the
other.
Student: Well, he is forced to; he has to in order to make the distinction, and if he can’t
make the distinction he can’t make the law.
LS: But since laws are evidently necessary (that he assumes), and since it is absolutely
necessary to make a distinction between a fellow who murders this fellow with malice
aforethought and another who did it only because he was having a brawl in a bar and then
the situation got out of hand—or this fellow was particularly weak, or whatever it may
be—and he dies, and that is not the same kind of crime. If you [don’t] do that you forget
a very important practical distinction; therefore you have to make the distinction. But
what I was driving at is this: that, as is shown by the concrete penal provisions, the
involuntary crimes are more connected with passion than those connected with pleasure,
if we take this crude distinction. Take what the French call a crime of passion: that is
treated, at least by the French legislator or judge, more leniently than a non-passionate
crime. That is fundamentally what Plato is driving at. If someone is planning the death of
another fellow in order to rob him of his money or whatever it may be, that is clear[ly a]
dastardly murder, but if he has been provoked by insult, then that is a milder case.
And here we make a subdivision: if he is provoked by insult and acts on the spur of the
moment, it is a milder case than if he postpones revenge because he would have now the
opportunity to think about it. And here you see how this distinction is also connected with
the crude notion of ignorance. Someone insults you, you get angry, [you] act
immediately. You have really no time to think. That is more like complete ignorance. If
you have time to think and you take your revenge next year, you are more responsible
because you could have thought and you did think more: you laid your plans. And if it is
the case of a very considered plan—a bank robbery with killing, where you have to go
into many, many details, make scientific observations of when the bank tellers come in,
how the alarm system functions—where a lot of knowledge has to be acquired in a very
scientific way, the responsibility is increased. There is no question that the distinction is a
sensible one. And on the other hand, we must not forget completely the truth underlying
this extreme assertion that all crime and all sin is due to ignorance. Why can we not
accept it for practical purposes? Because the honest businessman is in this respect as
ignorant as the criminal. If I take the honest businessman as a man who believes that it is
worthwhile to devote oneself, one’s life, to the gaining of wealth, that is gross ignorance.
But in this respect the criminal does not differ. Therefore the insight, the Socratic insight,
into what constitutes the true human life blurs the difference between the noncriminal
unwise and the criminal unwise, and society cannot afford that. But on the other hand, the

324
question of noncriminals choosing of the lower is also very important, even for society.
Therefore the two considerations are needed. To repeat: the first consideration, virtue is
knowledge; and the second consideration, the necessity of making a distinction between
criminal and noncriminal ignorance—I mean lack of wisdom. This is also necessary.
Student: It makes you wonder, though, how useful is the first assertion.
LS: That is easy to prove. Take a society all members of which are noncriminals. No one
ever hurts anyone else. They are even extremely delicate, so they would not even hurt
their feelings in any point—wonderful people, but completely deprived of any cultivation
of the mind. That is a question. Then one could perhaps be brought to see that this
society, however nice these people are, is deficient in the most important respect. That is
what he is thinking of. You see, what they call today culture—but not in the sense of
popular culture, the other kind of culture, the cultivation of the mind—was terribly
important to Plato and Aristotle. I think it is also important to us when we come to think
of it, but sometimes in purely political considerations we forget it. This they always had
in mind, and especially Plato. Plato thought all the time of this problem, the cultivation of
the mind. The cultivation of the mind is the higher consideration. The prevention of
injustice, in the simple sense of the word, is also a very important consideration, but Plato
would say, and I think he means this by the distinction between the best or noblest and
the most necessary, that the prevention of injustice is the most necessary thing: hurting
each other and shooting each other. But if this condition is fulfilled, it would still not be a
[worthwhile] society4 if it does not have the other things, too. The distinction [is] between
the availability of a certain health of the body which is indispensable for living and what
you do with your health.
Student: Well, I am getting sidetracked again.
LS: You are not sidetracked. On the contrary, I think that is really the point. Don’t
believe that this consideration of virtue is knowledge, with all the fantastic potentialities
implied in it, is devoid of practical meaning. Not at all.
Student: Well, you have to see what practical context you are in before you can see
whether or not you can use it. It is useful in a certain context but it is not always useful as
implied here.
LS: All right, because what is most urgent we always need. We always need. What is
highest we also always need, but we are less aware of it. That is so. But the fact that we
are not aware of it doesn’t mean that we do not need it.
Student: I was going to say that, somehow, don’t you have to make another distinction?
Couldn’t Plato say that crime is opinion, and that insofar as it is opinion there can be
voluntary and involuntary? I mean, a person can know very well that such and such act is
wrong, and do it anyway. Now from the point of view of the overall picture, I think we
can say this man is unwise, foolish, and ignorant in this sense. But at the same time,
trying to stay within the Platonic framework, on the level of opinion he opines or he

325
knows as much as any person in this political society can know anything. He knows that
such and such act is wrong and does it anyway, and therefore is punishable.
LS: For practical purposes, we doubtless say this all the time, and we mean here
especially knowledge of the law. I mean, a man knows what is forbidden and does it
nevertheless—that happens all the time, and it is in itself no problem. But the question is:
Is this knowledge of the law the practically decisive knowledge? If a man commits a
certain crime and he knows the law forbids it, what is the opinion on which he acts? The
opinion on which he acts is that the prohibition of the law is a secondary concern.
Obviously. So we have to find what is his primary concern; and the primary concern may
be, say, some form of self-interest.
Student: The problem I’m getting at is this. It seems to me it’s true that you can say
wrongdoing is a not-seeing of a certain kind, and that if a person really saw the truth of
this particular matter it would sort of overwhelm him. You can do this. But at the same
time, I think that somehow, supposing this is true, that Plato underestimates the evil that
men can do.
LS: He does not . . .
Student: I don’t think this is true either. I think he knows very well the evil men can do.
LS: Surely. He had no illusions.
Student: But is not the supremest evil to know the good and them deliberately not to—
LS: Yes, that is exactly the point. Plato denies that, that you can know the good and not
choose it. That is the important thing. You can have some awareness of that perhaps
partly based on opinion, i.e., what5 [you have] been told. You can have some inkling of it,
but if you would know it you couldn’t act against it. That is really Plato’s view. But let us
see; in order to make it a bit more exact, let us look at this. What is the consequence of
the Platonic view, the immediate consequence of the view that all vice is ignorance? It
leads in itself to the complete destruction of all punitiveness in man: Forgive them, they
don’t know what they do.ix That vulgar crime and especially the more sordid forms are
really terrible and must be punished and stamped out, we have no quarrel about that, but
the more subtle dangers do not lie there. I believe people like ourselves are ordinarily not
tempted to become sellers of heroin and this kind of thing. But the more subtle things are
such things as punitiveness, by which I do not mean that we would use our powers, if we
have such, to punish people (we may not do that ever), but in our thoughts, which is more
subtle than in our actions or even in our practical proposals. And that is what Plato
regards as one of the greatest blinders of man, punitiveness, because it has such a decent
beginning. I mean, if we are blinded by common passions, then we are ashamed,6 say, of
tyranny, or any other very bad and sordid thing. And then our justified indignation leads
us on and on and, say, logically that leads to all kinds of fantastic consequences.
ix

“Then said Jesus, ‘Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.’” Luke 23:34.

326

Starting from the surface it is absolutely necessary to make a distinction between
voluntary and involuntary; it goes without saying, and Plato has written the Laws in order
to show the necessity. But he also wanted to point out at the same time that this is really a
reflection of the greatest practical importance and yet of a fundamental superficiality at
the same time. It does not go to the root of the problem. Only Plato, in this dialogue, does
it the other way around: he starts from the premise “all crimes and sins are involuntary,”
and then adduces this to the other consideration. Generally speaking, I believe one can
say this—and up to now I have not seen any objection to that, any difficulty in Plato
which would induce me to change that—that for Plato there exists a fundamental
dualism, one connected with the mind and the other connected with the polis or society,
and the considerations stemming from the one are not identical with the considerations
stemming from the other, although there is a certain area where they overlap and agree.
But the difficulty is that they only overlap and are not fully identical. We had this
example. The kind of prevention of external injustice, the establishment of peace and
order in society and everything going along with that is obviously necessary and
important. That he would call and does call the most necessary. But there is another
consideration. There is also the consideration of the best, which is not provided for by a
consideration of the most urgent. And the two things are not necessarily in all points in
harmony. And if I am not mistaken, the difficulties in this book, and especially the
difficulties which are so great that no one dares to translate literally because of the
seeming absurdity are ultimately due to this fact.
Now let us go on and read a few more points. In 864b1 to 7, page 235, toward the end of
the long speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] But we are not now concerned with a verbal dispute. Since, however, it has been
shown that there are three kinds of sinning, we must first of all recall these still more
clearly to mind. Of these, one kind, as we know, is painful; and that we term passion and
fear.
LS: “Passionate” is the Greek word thymos, which is ordinarily translated by
“spiritedness” or something of this kind.
Reader:
[Ath.:] The second kind consists of pleasure and desires; the third, which is a distinct
kind, consists of hopes and untrue belief regarding the attainment of the highest good.
And when this last kind is subdivided into three, five classes are made, as we now assert;
and for these five classes we must enact distinct laws, of two main types. (864b-c)
LS: Now here you came into deep waters in trying to figure it out for your paper, and you
had the feeling that the suggestion by the translator doesn’t do. That was also my
impression. Now let me see how it says it: “untrue belief,” he says here (line 3 from
bottom on page 235). But I am very sorry to say that this is a change of the manuscript
text. The manuscript text, not correct, by Burnet the editor, is true opinion: “consists of

327
hopes and true opinion regarding the attainment of the highest goods.” And we have to
live with that, just as in the other passage, which I do not now remember, where such a
change is also made to the same effect. Maybe I can find it.
Student: Incidentally, Jowett translates it as “true opinion.”
LS: I see. Now whether there is a connection between this true opinion here and the
noble lie allusion in 861d, I do not know. I don’t claim that I can understand it, but I
would very much hesitate to change the text because that presupposes already that I know
what Plato could not have written, and that is a very great presumption. I mean, if it is a
meaningless word in Greek, then of course one must think of a solution, of curing the
text. But this is not a meaningless word. In other words, is it not possible that true opinion
about the best might lead to what at any rate legally is a crime? I see no difficulty in that.
If there is a cleavage between the nous and the nomos, and the nous, the mind, transcends
the nomos, I do not see why there could not be crimes on the basis not of ignorance but of
knowledge. Certainly one must consider this in trying to understand this passage.
Student: That would follow from what he said earlier, that the just person may do
something wrong, that is, may cause an injury. But here it is just following, or
summarizing according to what he said, and the third item in the summary is specifically
the problem of ignorance. In other words, he says—
LS: Yes, sure. But we have seen something last time of these distinctions of Plato, and
how carefully one has to work them out, much beyond what is written in the text. But if
the observation I made before, together with Mr. ____, is correct, what was the problem?
We must make a distinction between involuntary and voluntary crimes. And we must
therefore abandon the virtue-equal-to-knowledge equation, because once this is so, there
can only be one [kind of crime], i.e., involuntary. So we forget about that. How do we do
that? We make a distinction of three causes of crime which are called, so to say, passion,
pleasure, and ignorance. But, as appeared in our discussion, the distinction between
passion and pleasure is sufficient for making that distinction between involuntary and
voluntary crimes. To repeat: the involuntary crimes, the milder crimes, are those due to
passion; the voluntary crimes, the crimes severely to be punished, are those due to
pleasure. We don’t need that ignorance.
By the way, that occurs to me only at this moment, thanks to Mr. ____. But if this is so,
could not ignorance be replaced by knowledge as a possible source of crime? Now you
can say that is impossible, but I believe I can show it to you. And you know it already,
because this tension between nomos and nous shows the intrinsic possibility of a crime,
of an action against the nomos, which is inspired not by ignorance but by knowledge.
That this is the most noble crime, and the most rare crime, and the most innocent crime,
that is perfectly true but it is still legally a crime. So I believe, if I am not mistaken, that
this would be the solution to this problem. But I say this is a researchable hypothesis.
Now in the sequel [is] the punishment of involuntary killing. That we should perhaps
read, just as a specimen (865d, page 241, line 4 or 5).

328
Reader:
[Ath.:] And if anyone kill a free man involuntarily, he shall undergo the same
purifications as the man that has killed a slave; and there is an ancient tale, told of old, to
which he must not fail to pay regard. The tale is this,—that the man slain by violence,
who has lived in a free and proud spirit, is wroth with his slayer when newly slain, and
being filled also with dread and horror on account of his own violent end, when he sees
his murderer going about in the very haunts which he himself had frequented—
LS: Well, you must not laugh.
Reader:
he is horror-stricken; and being disquieted himself, he takes conscience as his ally, and
with all his might disquiets his slayer—both the man himself and his doings. Wherefore it
is right for the slayer to retire before his victim for a full year, in all its seasons, and to
vacate all the spots he owned in all parts of his native land; and if the dead man be a
Stranger, he shall be barred also from the Stranger’s country for the same period. (865de)
LS: That is sufficient. Now you must always look back to this fundamental statement
regarding the rationale of punishment. Look, Plato does not make here a distinction, as
far as I could see, between this barroom brawl and a truly accidental killing. For example,
you try to fell a tree; and without knowing it, another fellow is coming and the tree falls
on him and he is killed—these famous examples. And there is really no question of any
criminal or even blamable intent on the part of the man. It is not homicide, and yet I
believe you all know the feeling, at least I know it very well, that someone who killed
accidentally someone who was very dear to you, there is a barrier. And I believe there is
really something terrible. He killed your father. He didn’t do it intentionally and so on,
but it creates, it can very well create a barrier and, if I am not mistaken, that was much
more powerful in former generations of men than it is now. Here there is no question of
educating a man but it is necessary to expiate something. This consideration—and
therefore a myth comes in, the myth as the rationale and at the same time as a
consecration of a feeling with which the legislator must reckon. There are many more
cases of this kind. Let us turn to another passage a bit later on, 870d, page 257.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Concerning all these matters, the preludes mentioned shall be pronounced, and, in
addition to them, that story which is believed by many when they hear it from the lips of
those who seriously relate such things at their mystic rites,—that vengeance for such acts
is exacted in Hades, and that those who return again to this earth are bound to pay the
natural penalty,—each culprit the same, that is, which he inflicted on his victim,—and
that their life on earth must end in their meeting like a fate at the hands of another. To
him who obeys, and fully dreads such a penalty, there is no need to add to the prelude by
reciting the law on the subject; but to the disobedient this is the law which shall be stated
in the written code:—Whosoever of deliberate intent and unjustly slays with his own
hand any of the tribesmen shall, in the first place, be debarred from the lawful assemblies,
and shall not defile either temples or market or harbours or any other place of meeting,

329
whether or not any person warns off the doer of such deeds—for he is warned off by the
law, which is, and always will continue, warning him thus publicly, on behalf of the
whole State; and the man who failes to prosecute him when he ought, or fails to warn him
of the fact that he is thus debarred, if he be of kin to the dead man on either the male or
female side, and not further removed than a cousin, shall, first, receive upon himself the
defilement and the wrath of the gods, since the curse of the law bring also upon him that
of the divine voice, and, secondly, he shall be liable to the action of whosoever pleases to
punish him on behalf of the dead man. (870d-871b)
LS: You see, that is also another case: What about wholly unpremeditated murder, where
the great difficulty arises how to protect? I mean, it is not murder. The legislator is too
sophisticated to treat this man, who acted out of anger on provocation, as a murderer; but
on the other hand, the family insists on strict retribution.
Student: On about the middle of page 257, where it says that “vengeance for such an act
is an act of Hades and that those who return again . . . inflicted upon his victim,” what
sense do you make of that?
LS: Well, the main point is here the notion of certain types of homicide that demand
purification for its extinction.
Student: Dirty.
LS: At the crudest, stained. The society has been stained by that. Now if there are such
things as these stains which can be taken away only by expiation, that has nothing
whatever to do with a rational doctrine of punishment, according to which punishment is
improvement.
Student: I was disturbed by the statement: the same natural penalty that he inflicted on
his victim. How can you ever do that? You couldn’t really inflict the same.
LS: He develops that later. For example, do you remember the example of a woman—
Student: You mean the son who murders his mother and is later reborn as a woman, only
to suffer the same thing from her son?
LS: This kind of thing.
Student: But it would require the ability of man to return.
LS: In other words, a certain divine punishment in an afterlife, a rebirth must be
postulated in order that he dispose of those kinds of crimes which cannot be avenged
reasonably by man. But the main point is that the practice of the penal legislation differs
from the theory of rational legislation as stated to begin with. And a precise analysis
would have to bring out the principle of the deviation, i.e., the primary hypothesis
underlying the deviation. That would be another example of what I called the ceiling.

330

Student: That works fine, because only [in] the case of the punishment being exacted in
Hades could this rational punishment—that [is], a punishment which exactly fits the
crime—be worked out.
LS: Sure. That is true. To that extent it is rational.
Student: So that all these elaborate sorts of punishments which he describes are not
rational punishments.
LS: You only have to think of the variety of considerations. Someone may kill on a slight
provocation the father, the poor father of a poor family, so that the damage done is not
only that he has killed a man but that he has really ruined a whole family. Can the
legislator say in such a case: If the man is poor and has ten children, then the homicide
must get capital punishment, whereas if he is rich and has no children, then he gets off
with one or two years in jail? That would not work. And yet there is a certain
impropriety, unfitness in that sort of punishment, and therefore there is a need for this
kind of adjustment which cannot be done by human law.
Student: This really suggests then that the punishment is not rational?
LS: You can put it this way. We have read statements to this effect in a former passage. I
don’t know whether I have the reference here. In 728 or so there was a long discussion
which we discussed on a former occasion. Sure, in a way punishment is not rational. The
rational thing is education or cure, but in the case of the incurable, then extinction. That is
the rational procedure as Plato states it, and yet that doesn’t work because this mere
prevention of action without any cure is of tremendous practical importance, i.e., that a
fellow who would commit murder if it were safe does not in fact commit murder because
murdering is unsafe, is of tremendous importance to human society. Therefore, there is a
rationale too on this ground, but on a much lower ground, although on a practically, in a
way, much more important ground.
Student: Of course there would a certain school of sociologists who would question this,
i.e., whether punishment has the deterrent effect, at least the degree of preventive
qualities we think of it as having. And this has been the argument against capital
punishment.
LS: That it doesn’t improve man?
Student: Well, actually that people are not deterred from murdering other people by the
thought that a law exists against murder. In fact this has been set out very rigorously in a
report on capital punishment issued recently.
LS: But you know that there are also the opposite reports, also set out very rigorously, to
the opposite effect.

331
Student: True, it is difficult to establish absolute proof.
LS: I believe that it is equally difficult in both cases because it is in both cases wish, the
prejudice, which determines the investigation.
Student: Well, I wouldn’t defend this sort of thing.
LS: Well, let us take a very low character, but a shrewd guy who doesn’t want to have
too much unpleasantness. That he would consider the legal consequences of his action is,
I thought, a very elementary consideration.
Student: This depends upon the sort of criminal.
LS: The question of capital punishment is a matter by itself because very few people do
commit murder. But in the case of other crimes regarding property, deception, theft, and
so on, that this wouldn’t have an effect doesn’t seem credible, simply on the basis of what
you can observe.
Student: Well, my thought is simply this: that it has been observed that a certain class of
criminals will be deterred by the existence of punitive laws, but that other classes of
criminals will not be.
LS: Sure. That is shown by the existence of crime in spite of it. But I can also tell you
why. One reason is, of course, that there exists always the hope of not being discovered.
And it is simply this calculation among two low types, one who commits a crime and one
who does not commit a crime: What are the chances of discovery? Those who raise the
chances of discovery fairly high will be deterred; those who think of cops as dumb, as the
phrase goes, will not be deterred.
Student: Other things being equal.
LS: Yes, other things being equal. All these modern liberal attempts at replacing
punishment by cure can be understood, of course, by starting from the Platonic argument.
But what these people underestimate, and what Plato did not underestimate, are those
rough and ready and brutal needs of society to defend itself—where Plato was utterly
unsentimental.
Student: I think this is suggested by the relative lack of success to get this through
systematically.
LS: They abolished capital punishment in Britain, I believe.x
Student: Only certain sorts. You still get the problem of people who murder people
while they are in prison. These cases are a little difficult to handle.
x

The 1957 Homicide Act abolished hanging in Britain for certain kinds of murder. Capital
punishment was suspended in 1965 and abolished in 1969.

332

LS: There is no question.
Student: And the strictest proponents can’t get by this one.
LS: Yes, sure. And one can also say these other simply practical considerations: that
capital punishment excludes the possibility of revision, the only punishment which
excludes it, and it can happen that someone is legally condemned to death while being
innocent. This is a very important consideration. Whether it would cover all cases is
another matter. Sometimes there can be no doubt, no reasonable doubt.
Student: They tend to use that as one of the main arguments for the abolition of capital
punishment.
LS: Yes, that is intelligible. I mean, this thought is terrible to bear: that an innocent man
should legally be hanged.
Now there are a few more things. But it is so late that there is only one point I can draw
your attention to. But I leave it at this because it is so late. I read only a brief remark from
England, who is the commentator on Plato’s Laws, because it shows some difficulties
here. Speaking on 874de (page 269 bottom to 271 top): “These nine lines contain a
classification of personal injuries into fatal and not-fatal and a fanciful connection of the
two classes with previous parts of the work. The idea of the enumeration and
classification of bodily injuries inflicted by one’s fellow men, as a subject connected with
and following naturally upon the consideration of the nurture and training needed by the
body, seems to us far-fetched. It would be easy for us to believe either that the whole nine
lines, or at all events the two passages, were not from Plato’s hands at all.”xi
But the trouble is that these difficulties occur all the time when Plato makes such strange
divisions and omissions and fanciful things. One German interpreter says that the
introduction to the mention of the new subject is ganz sonderbar und ungeschickt, very
strange and inept. Sure, that happens all the time, not only in the Laws but also in the
other dialogues. Then one has simply to take the trouble to think a bit more deeply and
perhaps one finds the solution which is rational, sensible. And especially the Platonic
divisions, of which we had examples today and last time, always are very incomplete.
And one has to think about the subject matter, make the distinction complete, and see that
maybe some consideration comes to light which makes the whole discussion then
perfectly sensible.

1

Moved “also.”
Deleted “it makes.”
3
Deleted “of opinion origin.”
4
Moved “worthwhile.”
2

xi

The Laws of Plato, ed. Edwin Bourdieu England, vol. 2, 269-70.

333

5
6

Deleted “he has.”
Deleted “of the”

334
Session 13: February 26, 1959
Leo Strauss: That was a very good paper, and I am very glad of that. i In some cases I
don’t know whether you are not right. I am not convinced, however, that you are right.
But you raised very important questions, and one point which was somewhat dimly in my
mind before became somewhat clarified by what you said, which I mean to be a high
compliment. Now you said the dialogue, this book, deals with natural theology. That is of
course strictly correct. You know natural theology is the teaching regarding god which is
not based on revelation but only on man’s natural reason. By the way, purely historically,
this is the first, the oldest document containing demonstrations of the existence of god.
That is older than Aristotle. Now you have seen that this is an ambiguous book, and if I
state now the ambiguity in the extreme form—I remind you of a distinction which you
know from Augustine, who transmits a distinction made by a Roman writer, Varro, which
goes back to certain Greek writers—there are three kinds of theology: the philosophic
theology; the theology of the poets; and thirdly, civil theology, the theology of the
legislator. You were aware of the fact that this moves between the two extremes. It is
surely not a poetic theology. But is it a philosophic theology, or is it a civil theology?
That is the question. But in your discussion, which was very clear, you did not always
make a distinction between the intended ambiguities and the unintended ones. In other
words, partly you criticized Plato from a point of view which is not Plato’s; partly you
criticized him from Plato’s own point of view. And I will give you an example: 1 you said,
and this is the remark I found particularly helpful, the Athenian Stranger accepts here a
premise of the opponent, and a premise2 which one can prove that Plato would not have
accepted3, namely, that to be means to become, or to be in a state of becoming—in other
words, what we all know about the doctrine of ideas. Then you inserted this doctrine of
ideas (and I don’t blame you for that at all) and asked yourself: How does it look, how
does the argument look, in the light of the doctrine of ideas? If there is only becoming,
movement, be it only the self-movement of the soul, then there cannot be from Plato’s
point of view truth or knowledge, because that deals with the unchangeable as
unchangeable. Now if there cannot be truth and there cannot be knowledge, what we may
loosely call relativism follows and it becomes an untenable position. I am sure that there
is something there, but I believe that must be worked out much more finely—that there is
a common basis of the Athenian Stranger and his opponents, and this common basis is
not obviously Platonic. I mean, there is a real difficulty here. This much I grant you
gladly.
But in order to see that your solution is not quite sufficient, I mean from a Platonic point
of view, I remind you of this. There is one Platonic dialogue which deals most obviously
with what we call the religious issue, and that is the Euthyphron. Now the Euthyphron is
the dialogue on piety. There is one characteristic of the Euthyphyron, and that is a very
characteristic characteristic, namely, a word which does not occur in the whole dialogue.
It is the word soul. The Euthyphron discusses the problem of piety, i.e., of the gods, from
the impossible premise that there is no soul. The conclusion is: But there are ideas,
i

Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.

335
explicitly mentioned. So what Plato does in the Euthyphron is an experiment. He starts
from the problem of piety—you can also say from the problem of justice—and then it
leads up, if one studies it thoroughly and not simply with a mere superficial reading, to
the thought that there is no need whatever for god. What do you need? You do not need a
just god for your orientation: you need the knowledge of the idea of justice. If you say
gods are needed, just gods are needed, then the implicit argument is this. You must
distinguish the just gods from any possible unjust gods, and you distinguish them from
the point of view of justice. The ideas are higher than the gods. The silence about the soul
in the Euthyphron means, in my opinion, that the problem of the gods is identical with the
problem of the soul as distinguished from the ideas. Now in the Platonic schema, at least
as he has always presented it, whatever it may mean, the ideas are above the gods.
Consider the famous well-known presentation at the beginning of the Timaeus, where the
maker of the world looks at the ideas in order to make the world. This is, I think, a clear
expression of the state of affairs. And the ideas come up in the Laws only in book 12,
toward the end. Surely the whole discussion here is from Plato’s point of view
provisional, because you have to start somehow from the ideas. But this business, to be is
to become, which is here apparently the basis of the whole discussion, is the crucial point
and I am grateful to you for your observation.
If I take again the teaching going through Plato and state it all the time—which doesn’t
mean that it is explained: the soul is akin to the ideas, but it is not identical with the ideas.
And here in this argument the ideas do not come up at all, only the soul, and therefore it
is necessarily a defective argument.
There is one other point which you made, which can be stated as follows. You spoke of
the apologetic character of the whole argument. Is this not so much that he tries to prove
something as to disprove something? That is what you mean? I think one can state the
difficulty as follows. Why does the necessity of this argument of the tenth book arise at
all? Well, in Athens there are these atheistic and subversive books, but we are not in
Athens; we are in Crete, or say partly in Sparta. And no such books exist there; no one
has heard of them. Why the necessity of the whole tenth book? How would you answer
this question, I mean really entering seriously into the spirit? We are here in an oldfashioned society which is to become somewhat civilized, but it is basically oldfashioned. That the gods exist presents not the slightest difficulty for Clinias here. Why
does the Athenian, with a view to a faraway danger of certain things going on in Athens
and similar places, make this tremendous insertion of a long, theoretical, theological
discussion? How would you explain that? It is explained almost explicitly. Before he
speaks of these new-fangled books he speaks of another kind of writings. Do you
remember that?
Student: He speaks of the writings of the ancients.
LS: Yes, but what do you think he means by that?
Student: The oldest poets.

336
LS: Yes. Can you mention a name that might be helpful to some of us?
Student: Homer.
LS: Hesiod. I think Hesiod is more immediately important. All right, but say Homer and
Hesiod.
Student: Then I think I follow you, that in these books there are statements about the
gods which a reasonable man will think are foolish.
LS: Yes, and which are even immoral. And so, in other words, the point is this. They
have Homer or something like that, and this is very bad: this is, in its way, as bad as not
having any writings at all—I exaggerate a bit. So Homer must go, it is made clear
enough. Therefore, since the old writings are completely out, a vacuum is created into
which these new writings might come in if we would not erect a dam in time. That might
suffice at the moment as an explanation for that.
Now let us turn to the discussion. Surely, the tenth book of the Laws is the theological
statement of Plato. It is not much more than the second book of the Republic, which is of
course the second most important statement on the subject. The context here is penal law,
and that is by no means unimportant to consider. The book begins still in the old style.
We had assault and battery at the end of the ninth book; now here, violent taking-away,
i.e., robbery. From this subject he turns naturally to temple robbery, although we had this
discussed already at the beginning of book 9. But then temple robbery leads us to a more
profound consideration: that it could not be committed by any man who does not have
false opinions about the gods. They are enumerated in 885b and the later discussion
following that: (a) there are no gods; (b) they do not take care of men; and (c) that they
are bribable. You see, a man may believe in gods, providence, but if they can be bribed
by unjust men, he can behave unjustly in spite of that providence. So these are the three
issues. And then he repeats this statement (885d middle, page 299).
Reader:
[Ath.]: So we claim now, as you claimed in the matter of laws, that before threatening us
harshly, you should first try to convince and teach us, by producing adequate proofs, that
gods exist, and that they are too good to be wheedled by gifts and turned aside from
justice. (885d)
LS: That’s all I mean. You see here he repeats it, but with a change. Plato never repeats
identically. What is the change?
Student: He leaves out that they take care of men.
LS: Providence. So that gives us the first inkling, and I believe that even in this class,
with the provisional reading being done, that we can show it: that the most problematic
part of the discussion is this status of providence. We will come to that later.

337
Clinias doesn’t see a problem to begin with. He sees two very easy proofs of the
existence of the gods. And they are? Do you remember?
Student: He points to the earth and the sun and the moon.
LS: Everyone knows that there are gods, number one. And number two?
Student: The fact that the earth, the sun and the moon are divine beings, somehow.
LS: No, no, that was number one. Everyone knows that sun, moon and stars are gods
(except the Jews; they didn’t know anything of that). And number two? Everyone
believes, the consensus gentium, all nations believe that there are gods. The Athenian
says these two arguments are not good enough (886a to b). There are atheists, the
Stranger says, and then he makes the very remarkable statement, which is not
consistently maintained, that atheism is not necessarily due to intemperance, to the desire
to live as you like, but it may be due to an ignorance which [one] believes to be the
greatest wisdom. I do not know whether all of you know that, but I remember this very
well, that in older societies the old-fashioned people could not believe that a man is an
unbeliever if he is not wicked—I mean, morally bad. And there is one simple sign which
I don’t believe is as well-known in Christianity as it is in Judaism: in Judaism the
unbeliever is called an epicurean; in other words, a lover of pleasure. For Clinias, of
course, that is a man who does not want to do his duty; therefore, he seeks an excuse by
not believing in the gods. Now then he speaks of the various writings regarding the gods:
the older ones, Hesiod; and the modern ones. Hesiod of course admits gods and speaks of
their coming into being all the time, but the difficulty is created by the most recent
writings. They say that sun and moon and stars and the earth are stones, inanimate bodies,
not gods. You remember the stones at the beginning of the Minos? But we have to raise
this question. There was another argument, the argument not taken from the accepted
divinity of the stars, but the argument taken from the consent of all nations. What do
these modern men do with the consent of all nations? Yes?
Student: I notice in the argument here, Clinias’s repetition adds the moon to the list.
LS: To the Athenian’s list? I hadn’t noticed that. Can you explain it? Give me the exact
passage.
Student: 886d.
LS: That is the Athenian speaking—sun and moon and stars and earth, but where did
the—
Student: Clinias had said earth, sun, stars.
LS: Where was that?
Student: 886a.

338

LS: I see. Sun, stars and everything. He surely doesn’t mention the earth, and he does not
explicitly mention the moon. But still you must not forget that the moon is in a way
implied, because he speaks later of the month. You know, the division of the year into
seasons and months, and that comes of course from the moon.
Student: I don’t want to labor the point, but after these comments he says that the wise
men of Athens say there are only earth and rocks. And the moon in a way is the closest
link to the heavenly bodies.
LS: That could be, but you gave me unintentionally an answer to my question, namely,
this: The Greeks regard also the earth as a goddess, but do all barbarians do that? I simply
do not remember now the passage in the third book of Herodotus, where he speaks of the
worship of the Persians.
Student: I do not believe they worshipped the earth, as I remember.
LS: I think Clinias renders tolerably correctly the belief shared by everyone, Greeks and
barbarians, [about] the heavenly bodies. Then one simply has to look up the passage in
Herodotus to see whether there, when he speaks of the Persians, the moon is mentioned. I
do not know.
Student: As I remember it, they worshipped sun, moon and stars.
LS: I see, so the earth would be the addition. But I am grateful to you for the observation
that there is a certain switch, which again shows that there is never a simple repetition.
There is always some illuminating change. But may I repeat my question: What do these
modern writings say about the argument, taken from the consent of the nations, that all
nations worship gods, hence there must be gods?
Student: Different gods.
LS: And then, of course, the question would always arise between the wise and the
unwise within the nation. That would be.
After having been informed that there are such perverse people, the Cretan admits the
necessity of a discussion, or rather of a prelude regarding the gods. And this prelude
would be a defense of all laws, because the whole legislation will depend on the belief in
gods. Now we had already a prelude to the whole legislation in book 5, as you may
remember, in which also the gods were mentioned very emphatically. But this prelude
was not argumentative; it was merely a dogmatic statement. So we have then to turn to a
discussion. Here there is a special difficulty against which the Athenian warns us, i.e., the
danger of indignation. We have to be patient and meek even in this discussion and to be
free from any anger or indignation. Now let us turn to the beginning of the discussion in
888 (bottom, page 307).

339
Reader:
[Ath.]: How, I ask, can one possibly use mild terms in admonishing such men, and at the
same time teach them, to begin with, that the gods do exist? Yet one must bravely attempt
the task; for it would never do for both parties to be enraged at once,—the one owing to
greed for pleasure, the other with indignation at men like them. (888a)
LS: You see, here the Athenian accepts again a diagnosis which he had originally
questioned: that it is simply desire for pleasures which prompts these men. But why does
he impute immorality to the atheists here? In the context, it makes perfectly clear sense.
The imputation of immorality is made here in order to reinforce the demand for nonindignant, non-angry arguments. You see, in other words, he says as it were: If we are
angry and unrestrained, we are as immoral as they are, only in a different way, you know.
That is the context in which it is meant. Now let us go on where you left off.
Reader:
So let our prefatory address to the men thus corrupted in mind be dispassionate in tone,
and, quenching our passion, let us speak mildly, as though we were conversing with one
particular person of the kind described, in the following terms— (888a)
LS: Why with one, as emphasized?
Student: It is easier. It is easier to have a discussion with one person than with many
persons.
LS: What is the official teaching of Socrates in the dialogues when he speaks about this
issue? Well, he makes the distinction between rhetoric, in which a man addresses many,
and dialectics, in which one speaks to one. Whether others are present or not is a
secondary consideration. The one-to-one is the higher form because it is less emotional
and so on. But what does he do here? Is this a one-to-one conversation?
Student: Well, if it were a one to one . . .
LS: Why is it not one to one?
Student: Because this one person represents a whole . . .
LS: No. That is all right. But who is speaking to him?
Student: He is speaking to himself.
LS: No, no. That is in every dialogue within a dialogue. That is also important, that it is a
dialogue within a dialogue. But we have this one man, this one atheist, and who speaks to
him, one or many? The three. In other words, it is a somewhat unfair situation. That is
what you meant by more easy?
Student: No.

340

LS: But you smelled something of that?
Student: No. I was referring to the fact that if you were arguing, it is easier to prevail on
a point in a one-to-one argument than if you are facing three or four people. There it is
one man against three or four men.
LS: That may also be. But I think the main point here is that there is a kind of collective
on one side and a poor, puny individual on the other. That creates a somewhat difficult
situation. And the main point which he makes in the sequel is then that no one has ever
persevered in atheism until his old age. That is said to a young man—an edifying remark.
Then we come to the discussion proper and first to the thesis of atheism, which begins to
be stated at 888e. We begin to read a bit later, because I repeat the main point here first.
What do these people say? Now let us try to forget everything we know from the history
of philosophy, because the history of philosophy we know after all on the basis of what
certain pupils of pupils of pupils of Plato wrote. You know, the historians of philosophy
like Diogenes Laertius, and other people of whom we have only the fragments, and then
we know a bit from [the] fragments, [which are] difficult to understand as fragments, and
the reports in Plato and Aristotle. That’s the oldest report we have about anything going
on prior to Socrates, coherent report. That is a very important source and one not properly
appreciated, I believe. Now what do these people say? They say the primary thing is
nature and chance, and the secondary thing is art. Nature and chance are used here
interchangeably. Why? Why are nature and chance used interchangeably? After all, we
are accustomed to the distinction between the two, from Aristotle and Plato.
Student: Well, things which happen by nature might also be chance in reference to the
knowing of them. It wouldn’t entail the knowledge of nature . . .
LS: No, I don’t believe that is said, because then they would not be nature and chance in
the same sense. That is what he means.
Student: In respect of the things themselves moving there is nature, and in respect of the
whole there is chance.
LS: No, I believe it is in the same respect, namely, the absence of mind, the complete
absence of mind, the complete absence of intention. When Dante describes in the Divine
Comedy Democritus, he said: “Democritus who traced everything to chance.” ii Of course
that is based on an Aristotelian statement, but it is ultimately what Plato means. The
ultimate alternative is rule of mind or rule of mindlessness. Mindlessness is in a way the
same as what we mean by chance. Now this nature or chance beings is here presented as
the four elements: earth, water, fire, and air. He could as well have chosen the atoms;
apparently he thought this is more simple to understand in the present context. Don’t
forget that the word “philosophy” never occurs in the tenth book, as we have seen. The
heavenly bodies in particular are inanimate and therefore the very opposite of any gods.
The motions also have entirely this chance character. To take the extreme case, if a stone
ii

Inferno, Canto 4, l. 137.

341
falls to the earth, according to Aristotle that is not chance but is a meaningful event,
because the earth is the place, the natural place of heavy bodies. In other words, these
men in a way say the same thing that modern science says: there are just certain atoms
acting and reacting on each other with no rhyme or reason. It just happens, and the
outcome of that is the visible universe. Did you want to say something? No. So let us
begin to read at 889c (page 313), the third sentence in the long speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] It is by chance all these elements move, by the interplay of their respective forces,
and according as they meet together and combine fittingly,—hot with cold, dry with
moist, soft with hard, and all such necessary mixtures as result from the chance
combination of these opposites,—in this way and by these means they have brought into
being the whole Heaven and all that is in the Heaven, and all animals, too, and plants—
after that all the seasons had arisen from these elements; and all this, as they assert, not
owing to reason, nor to any god or art, but owing, as we have said, to nature and chance.
(889b-c)
LS: There you have the theory. What he4 [calls] “reason” would be more correctly
translated by “intelligence” or “mind,” but it amounts to the same things for practical
purposes. That is the opposition. Nature is understood as the opposite of mind. And also,
a little bit earlier he says “According to chance out of necessity.” That is the same. This
kind of necessity, what we call now mechanical necessity, is chance, because it is
meaningless. Bodies move without any aim, without any end. They come together; there
are all kinds of things of pushing and pulling; that is all there is to it. That is necessary in
a way, but an unintelligible necessity, a meaningless necessity. And now let us go on
where we left off.
Reader:
As a later product of these, art comes later; and it, being mortal itself and of mortal birth,
begets later playthings which share but little in truth, being images of a sort akin to the
arts themselves—images such as painting begets, and music, and the arts which
accompany these. Those arts which really produce something serious are such as share
their effect with nature,—like medicine, agriculture, and gymnastic. Politics too, as they
say, shares to a small extent in nature—
LS: “Politics” is of course not a perfect translation; it means the political skill, the
political art.
Reader:
but mostly in art; and in like manner all legislation which is based on untrue assumptions
is due, not to nature, but to art. (889c-e)
LS: So the arts are derivative. I don’t have to do much explaining here because that is
what modern science teaches also, naturally. In the first place, you have purely inanimate
things producing animate things, and these animate things, in certain cases—especially
that of man—produce cultures and civilizations or art. He makes here a distinction

342
between three kinds of art. The first is the imitative arts. They have nothing in common
with nature except that they imitate it; their products are not natural. For example, a man
makes a painting, say, a painted man. This painted man doesn’t breathe; he doesn’t
generate. That is a mere5 [reflection] of what is by nature. Then we come to the serious
arts: medicine, farming, and gymnastics. This is work by bodies, human bodies, on
bodies, and there something can be achieved. These three arts have some respectability.
And then we come to a third kind of art, which is in between. It is a bit more serious than
the imitative arts but much less serious than gymnastics, farming, and medicine: and this
is politics. But he makes here a distinction between politics, which has very little in
common with nature and much more with art—but the whole legislative art is entirely
nonnatural and merely artificial because its theses, its assertions, are untrue. So there is a
distinction (and this is quite interesting) between the political art, which has something to
do with nature, and the legislative art, which is purely fictitious or dealing with fictions.
Again, we should recognize present-day views: the interest of present-day scientific
political scientists in politics as distinguished from the legal interpretation for
understanding of them is in accordance with that. Group politics then exists, but what is
coming out finally on the statute books is as such nothing compared with the real things,
i.e., the group politics.
Student: Could this be a mistranslation here: “only that legislation which is based on
untrue assumptions is due to art”?
Student: Jowett translates it just the other way around: “only also that legislation is
entirely a work of art and is based on assumptions which are not true.”
LS: I don’t know what he does. He doesn’t change the text. No, it is a question on which
the relative clause depends. I think it is more natural to translate it as Jowett apparently
translates it: that the whole legislative art is not by nature but by an art the positions of
which are not true. That I think makes very much sense. Well, take a fellow trying to get
the most—how does Lasswell say? Who gets what, when, how. iii This part of politics is
surely natural. These are living beings who try to get the most of the benefits and the
minimum of the deprivations. That’s natural. Then of course that always takes place
within a framework which is not natural, which is merely set up by men, and therefore
the whole scheme is artificial with some natural elements working within it. But as far as
the laws go, that is to say, that framework, that is entirely artificial. I think that makes
sense. Now let us read the sequel: Clinias doesn’t quite understand, and we can’t blame
him, because we have studied social science.
Reader:
[Clin.:] What do you mean?
[Ath.:] The first statement, my dear sir, which these people make about the gods is that
they exist by art and not by nature,—by certain legal conventions which differ from place
to place, according as each tribe agreed when forming their laws. They assert, moreover,
iii

Harold Laswell (1902-1978), American political scientist, author of Politics: Who Gets What,
When, How (1935).

343
that there is one class of things beautiful by nature, and another class beautiful by
convention; while as to things just, they do not exist at all by nature, but men are
constantly in dispute about them and continually altering them, and whatever alteration
they make at any time is at that time authoritative, though it owes its existence to art and
the laws, and not in any way to nature. (889e-890a)
LS: Let us stop here for one moment. This is then the social philosophy implied in this
natural philosophy. The gods are entirely artifacts, mere human positings. As regards the
beautiful or the noble, that is not so simple. There are things noble by nature, but they are
not those which are generally regarded as noble, which are only noble by convention and
to which they are opposed. As for the just things, they are entirely artificial. The
difference between that and modern relativism, at least what they call relativism, is that
these people at any rate say there are things which are by nature noble. It is also different
for another reason, but let us leave it at that. What could these fellows mean, “things
which are by nature noble”? In a way, it is recognized by these, by the tough people in
our social science, although they don’t say it because, I believe, they don’t think about it
sufficiently. Certainly it is implied.
Student: The rule of the stronger.
LS: Yes, sure. Once you say the essence of political life is power, period, 6then you say
already by that that those who own more power or know to use it well and efficiently,
they are of course superior by the standard inherent in the situation to those who are inept
in that or who lack power. Of course you must not forget that this also has some appeal to
common understanding, because people are generally impressed by men superior in
power, wealth or dominion, whatever it may be. So that is what is meant here.
Student: I was going to say that on the next page, however, the Athenian includes the
honorable among those strictly artificial.
LS: But let us go on step by step. Read on where we left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] All these, my friends, are views which young people imbibe from men of science,
both prose-writers and poets, who maintain that the height of justice is to succeed by
force; whence it comes that the young people are afflicted with a plague of impiety, as
though the gods were not such as the law commands us to conceive them; and, because of
this, factions also arise, when these teachers attract them towards the life that is right
“according to nature,” which consists in being master over the rest in reality, instead of
being a slave to others according to legal convention. (890a)
LS: Now we see here first that these same people, the predecessors of our present-day
relativists, speak of a life which is correct according to nature, namely, this: once I see
that many things are merely conventional and therefore have no intrinsic dignity, I look
of course for a life which is correct not merely according to convention but according to
nature. For example, let us assume that power is the decisivewhich . . . we have by

344
nature, then the correct life according to nature would be the possession of power and the
clever use of it. But there is one great change made here, because now these people say
that to win, to be victorious through violence, is the justest thing. In the immediately
preceding statement they said there is nothing just at all, but now they do that. How
come? That cannot be a mere slip in a few lines. What drives these people from the denial
of the just thing to an assertion that something is just, or even superlatively just?
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, well that could still be a pure fiction. But look at it concretely. Once you say
that everything that is said about justice by people is nonsense, a mere artifice with no
intrinsic meaning, but nevertheless that there are differences among men, differences
which are in themselves subject to evaluation. Now let us try to look at this and try to
express it in this loose modern language. What is animating man, and certainly political
man, is the drive for power. As Machiavelli puts it, there is this desire for acquisition.
Now if this is of the essence of man, it follows that our natural standard for judging
differences among men is with a view to their capacity to acquire. So we arrive at what is
called by nature noble as distinguished from the conventionally noble. But now let us
look at the situation as it must appear in any practical discussion. Once I have seen that it
is natural to acquire in this sense—and that this is the key thing of human life—but then
hear all the time that you shouldn’t acquire too much, that love of gain is something base,
that it is unjust, then there is a problem. Confronted with this objection, I am of course
compelled to say: No, on the contrary, that is of course just because I can’t help doing it.
And so it is inevitable to go over from the consideration of nobility to the consideration
of justice. And from this point of view, what Hobbes later on did when he said that the
inevitable, which no one can help willing, that alone is by nature just, is implied already
here.
Student: I think it should be added that this is what is said to young people; it is not
simply an argument, but it takes on a political context. That’s the first time he has
mentioned that they say this to young people.
LS: Yes, but there was already a reference in 888a7, when the man addressed was “You
child, you are young.”
Student: But this change occurs when the philosophers and poet . . .
LS: Oh, that is very good. And the Platonic evidence for that?
Student: The Republic.
LS: Clearer, I believe, in the Gorgias, where Callicles speaks of natural justice. That is
true. That is a good point. Here what it says is also in a way remarkable, because Plato
could say this from his own point of view: that this is the essence of justice, i.e., to slave
to others according to law. Say, to help others, to benefit others, is justice. To benefit
others means from this point of view, however, to slave to others because that is

345
something that has nothing to do with your intention, which is strictly speaking selfish.
Now where was this remark about the noble that you mentioned in your report?
Student: In the next Athenian speech.
LS: Yes, but that is in a different context, because [the remark is made] from their point
of view. Now let us turn to 890d, which is the relatively long speech of Clinias.
Reader:
[Clin.:] Certainly not, Stranger; on the contrary, if persuasion can be applied in such
matters in even the smallest degree, no lawgiver who is of the slightest account must ever
grow weary, but must (as they say) “leave no stone unturned” to reinforce the ancient
saying that gods exist, and all else that you recounted just now—
LS: Literally translated, “must become a helper to the ancient law by the speech”—they
try to change the text here—“that there are gods and all the other things which you have
just said.” Continue.
Reader:
and law itself he must also defend and art, as things which exist by nature or by a cause
not inferior to nature, since according to right reason they are the offspring of mind, even
as you are now, as I think, asserting; and I agree with you. (890d)
LS: Yes. Well, I think he means to say that to come to [the] help 7 [of] the ancient nomos
by the speech that there are gods, and to come to [the] help 8 [of] the nomos and9 art by
proving that both nomos and art are by nature. Let us skip the next two speeches and read
at 891b.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Most certainly it is, Megillus; and we must do as he says. For if the assertions
mentioned had not been sown broadcast well-nigh over the whole world of men, there
would have been no need of counter-arguments to defend the existence of the gods; but
as it is, they are necessary. For when the greatest laws are being destroyed by wicked
men, who is more bound to come to their rescue than the lawgiver? (891b)
LS: I believe this confirms my view that here the speeches regarding the gods as they are
are called laws. These speeches are in themselves not merely theoretical assertions. We
need speeches on behalf of the greatest laws, and these protecting speeches on the behalf
of the greatest laws are different from the original speeches about the gods. In the
immediate sequel (and we cannot read everything) there occurs the second oath of the
Athenian. I would like to point this out to those individuals who are sufficiently
interested in such little things. In 891d to e Clinias realizes, and that is important, that one
must go beyond the laws for the sake of the laws. To remain within the province of the
laws is absolutely impossible, and therefore, of course, we must read this long argument.
Now we begin to read at 892a. We come now to the real proof.

346
Reader:
[Ath.:] As regards the soul, my comrade—
LS: You see, here he translates rightly by “comrade.”
Reader:
nearly all men appear to be—
LS: I just wonder why. I don’t know whether he ever said “my comrade” before, and if
he did not that would be very remarkable. And then, why here? You know “comrade” has
a political connotation, although not the one it has in the twentieth century—the opposite,
rather: the oligarchic clubs. Continue.
Reader:
ignorant of its real nature and its potency, and ignorant not only of other facts about it,
but of its origin especially,—how that it is one of the first existences, and prior to all
bodies, and that it more than anything else is what governs all the changes and
modifications of bodies. And if this is really the state of the case, must not things which
are akin to soul be necessarily prior in origin to things which belong to body, seeing that
soul is older than body? (892a)
LS: That sketches the general argument. He will prove that the soul is prior to the body.
Now if the soul is prior to the body, then law and art, which belong to the soul, are also
prior to the body and cannot be understood from the point of view of the primacy of the
body. That is the general trend of the argument.
Student: He means prior in time, does he not?
LS: Here, surely.
Student: But he is trying to prove that it is logically prior.
LS: “Logically”—that word doesn’t exist. In rank, that is true. I am delighted that you
look on his fingers while he is proceeding. So the primacy of the soul, that is the crucial
point. Everything will turn around that. Now let us read the next speech.
Reader:
[Clin.:] Necessarily.
[Ath.:] Then opinion and reflection and thought and art and law will be prior to things
hard and soft and heavy and light; and further, the works and actions that are great and
primary will be those of art, while those that are natural, and nature itself,—which they
wrongly call by this name—will be secondary, and will derive their origin from art and
reason. (892b)

347
LS: In other words, what he says is this: you [wrongly] call10 natural what is not natural,
namely, the merely bodily. The truly natural is the soul and everything connected with
that. Continue.
Reader:
[Clin.:] How are they wrong?
[Ath.:] By “nature” they intend to indicate production of things primary; but if soul shall
be shown to have been produced first (not fire or air), but soul first and foremost,—it
would most truly be described as a superlatively “natural” existence. Such is the state of
the case, provided that one can prove that soul is older than body, but not otherwise.
(892c)
LS: By the way, I would like to say there is another Platonic dialogue in which this
thought is developed along these lines, and you found some allusions to it in today’s
report. And that is the Sophist, in which a distinction is made between human art and
divine art. And the divine art is of course the cause of everything which we call the
natural, and this divine art has the mind as the cause. Now let us go on.
Reader: iv
[Clin.:] How are they wrong?
[Ath.:] By “nature” they intend to indicate production of things primary— (892c)
LS: That is not literally translated. It is a very difficult sentence. “Nature, they wish to
say, is the genesis, the coming into being, the change, which takes place regarding the
first—which is connected with the first things.” Nature is the originally generating. But
the expression here indicates . . .
Student: “First things” in the sense of time again, or of ranking or importance? There is a
certain ambiguity here.
LS: Surely. And do you think I would like to avoid that, and wallow in the most terrible
ignorance? Surely we must distinguish. Under one condition, primacy of time would be
absolute irrelevant, i.e., if there is an eternity of motion. Then there could not be primacy
in time. There would never be a first motion. In this case, there could only be primacy of
rank, and that is a great darkness here, to which we come later. Before I go on with the
discussion, I must say one thing. This statement, “It is genesis connected with the first
things,” would seem to imply that there are first things—beings which are the cause of
this motion—which are not necessarily in themselves moved. That we must also
consider. The question whether he presupposes here a beginning of motion or assumes
the eternity of motion is very dark.
Student: Especially when you start bringing the causal language in.
LS: What is causal and noncausal? Explain that.
iv

The reader repeats a passage just read.

348
Student: What he is trying to prove is an unmoved mover. He is using a causal argument
here, as I understand it.
LS: Every argument, I would say, is causal.
Student: Well, I think when we get further in I can show you . . .
LS: You mean efficient cause, don’t you?
Student: No, I think first cause is what he has in mind.
LS: First causes can be efficient, can be material, can be final—so that won’t settle that.
Student: In this argument, I think what he means, or what he seems to be saying, is first
cause in a temporal sense, and yet he goes from this to necessarily first or logically first.
LS: In rank. “Logically” doesn’t exist, but we don’t know yet. He merely speaks of first;
firstness in time is strongly suggested, but it is not so clearly said as to exclude all other
considerations. But if you take the crude notion which prevails in modern times, would
not the motion connected with atoms be prior to any motion connected with the stones as
stones and plants as plants?
Student: Prior in what sense?
LS: In both senses, I believe.
Student: Well, you can conceive of the motion of a stone and the atomic motion within
the stone as going on simultaneously. Again, I don’t know precisely what you mean by
prior here.
LS: I only say what you learn in every elementary course in science. There were times
when there were no stones.
Student: What do you mean?
LS: The whole visible universe had a beginning in time, and was preceded by some
“stuff” out of which it came into being. And if you go back you arrive eventually at
certain elements, not elements in the chemical sense now, but certain first things beyond
which you cannot go. They are effective even now, of course: the atomic structure and
what is going on there. They are still effective. That is what you mean.
Student: I still don’t quite understand your point.
LS: These, what you say is going on simultaneously, the movement of the stone and the
atomic things going on within the stone. But the one is older than the other. The atomic

349
movements are older than the stone because there were atoms prior to the being of stones.
That is the same problem, I believe.
Student: Perhaps it would help if you could explain why priority in time means priority
in rank.
Different student: May I say something here? It just seems to me that the question of
priority of time, and whether the soul is body and is older than the body or not, they are
two separate questions. And that the question of the soul being prior to the body is
arrived at, I think, by an argument that abstracts from the problem of a creation which
had a beginning in time. The levels of his abstraction are different. The problem is
different.
LS: Let us get it straight. If motion is eternal, you cannot speak of a first motion in time,
because every motion was preceded by another motion. So you can speak of a first
motion in time only if there is a beginning of motion as such. But this doesn’t do away
with the question of the primacy in rank. That could still be.
Student: But you don’t prove the primacy in rank from the primacy in time. Is this valid?
LS: All right, that is a very important question. Why is it not valid? Plato, I would say,
would be inclined to say that the first motion—let us assume that there is nothing else in
the world except the first motion—this first motion would indeed be in rank the highest.
Why? And why are we told not to believe it?
Student: Well, this is the part that completely throws me. First of all, he wouldn’t
assume this, would he? Motion or energy would be eternal for him. On the notion of the
idea of time or motion, then certainly there would be a priority to the original idea of
time. This would be a certain kind of priority which wouldn’t apply to time at all, if this
is what you mean. But then again, he doesn’t do this.
LS: I really don’t understand you. Does anyone else understand what Mr. ___ is driving
at? Because it may be my special misfortune not to see it. I believe you didn’t make it
clear.
Student: If you would repeat your question again.
LS: I believe I understand your difficulty. Plato seems to say, to imply this: Let us
assume that there is a first motion and literally nothing else in the world except that first
motion, and that first motion accounts for everything else which follows later. Then this
first motion is first not only in time but also in rank.
Student: Yes, if these circumstances had occurred, certainly it would be.
LS: Oh, you admit that?

350
Student: If this had occurred, but in Plato’s view motion would be eternal, would it not? v
LS: —the hypothesis that there is a first motion. Then I would say that Plato would still
say this first motion would be also highest in rank. And then I hoped you would say,
“Here we have this terrible dogmatist,” because we reject that. But you accepted it.
Student: Well, I accepted it without understanding it.
LS: Well, what do you learn in school today? What is the first motion? I have been told
something about a uranium atom. Who says this uranium atom, or the explosion or
whatever it was, is the highest in rank? I bet you believe—but if not you, quite a few
others, but I think implicitly you believe it too—that the movement which produced
Hamlet is infinitely higher in rank than this completely stupid explosion of that uranium
atom. Or let us take a simple example. Man comes much later than stones in the
evolution, but we believe—not as scientists but as simple human beings—that what
comes later, out of the more primitive and the more stupid, is higher in rank. Take the
ordinary evolutionist view, which is of course atheistic. To illustrate: If you take this
view that there is God here, and here let us say the uranium atom [LS writes on the
blackboard] and here is man, then of course it is clear that this movement is somehow
guided by God, and the genesis of man is not to be explained merely in terms of the
uranium atom. Do you see? That is clear, and therefore I said nothing about it. But Plato
would say it is absolutely impossible that this thing can be the beginning, that there was a
uranium atom or whatever you take, and that out of it the mind can possibly have
emerged. That is the issue, which is a bit covered over because he speaks of four
elements. But his little step from the four elements to the uranium atom, that we all can
take.
Student: I think I understand what he is trying to do, even though I don’t agree with it.
LS: You shouldn’t agree with him until he has proved his point, certainly.
Student: May I ask what you mean by a primacy of rank if there is an eternity of motion?
LS: Don’t forget Aristotle. An eternity of motion, and yet the heavenly motions are
higher in rank than what is going on on earth.
Student: But what does this higher in rank mean? Is there any relation of causality
between the two?
LS: One way. Heaven influences us. We depend on it—snow, to say nothing of the sun.
And yet the sun doesn’t depend on us.
Student: Well, it seems to me that what Plato says here is that, granted it is irrelevant to
be decided now whether there is an eternity of motion or not, what I am saying is that
irregardless of that question, the priority of the soul is not simply in rank but also in
v

There was a break in the tape at this point.

351
causality. This motion, even if it were granted that it were eternal, somehow is moved
motion.
LS: Surely Plato says that the soul is higher in rank than the body. There is no question
about that. But he also seems to say that soul is first in time, and that he uses this popular
expression that it is older than the body has definitely a temporal connotation. And I only
said that I think it is a characteristic of the argument that this question of the eternity or
non-eternity of motion is not stated. That is one point. Now let us go on and read where
we left off. 892c2.
Reader:
[Ath.:] By “nature” they intend to indicate production of things primary is the genesisvi—
(892c)
LS: “Connected with the first things,” that is the literal translation.
Reader:
but if soul shall be shown to have been produced first (not fire or air), but soul first—
LS: That is also not literal enough, considering its importance: “if the soul will come to
sight first” would be absolutely literal. Or it can also mean “if the soul will come to sight
as the first.”
Reader:
and foremost,— it would most truly be described as a superlatively “natural” existence.
Such is the state of the case, provided that one can prove that soul is older than body, [but
not otherwise].
[Clin.]: Most true. (892c)
LS: You see, he does not say, again, that the soul is simply the first. That is important.
Among the first and older than the body, but not simply the first.
Student: This is an adequate translation. “Such as he stated the case provided that one
can prove that the soul is older than the body, but not otherwise.” Is that literal enough?
LS: Yes, that is literal enough. Older than the body doesn’t mean the oldest, that is clear.
That is of some importance in that that is a kind of allowance for something perhaps
higher than the soul, what Plato calls the ideas. It is also not said that the soul is always,
or will be always, or was always. That is important. This is the thesis. The proof is given
in a conversation within a conversation, which will prove to be a conversation with a
young man. If we had any doubt about it, it will be dispelled by a remark in 900c. The
conversation is with a young man because of the oldness of the two old Dorians; they can
no longer walk and swim as easily as a young man can. Now let us omit something, skip
the next long speech of the Athenian and begin at the next long speech of the Athenian in
893b, page 327.
vi

In the Loeb: “they intend to indicate the production of things primary”

352

Reader:
[Ath.:] Come then,—if ever we ought to invoke God’s aid, now is the time it ought to be
done. (893b1-2)
LS: Note that “god” is singular.
Reader:
Let the gods be invoked with all zeal to aid in the demonstration of their own existence.
(893b2-5)
LS: You see here a very strange transition in the same sentence from the singular to the
plural. One could suggest of course this simple distinction, because the Greek word, like
the Latin word deus (with a small letter), means not only god but also a god. So they call
on one god, but that doesn’t completely help the situation. And this is very strange
because it is matched with another thing, namely, in the sequel, when you look at 893c,
where he begins with a question: “Some things are being moved and others are at rest, I
shall say.” Do you see that? Now if you skip the next two speeches you see that when he
speaks again he says: “We shall say.” And then later on, “We learn” and then again
“We.” In brief (we would have to read too much [more] than we can afford in this class
to see all of this), this transition from the singular to the plural in the case of the gods is
matched by a strange transition from the singular to the plural of the human speaker. I am
not in a position to offer an explanation of it, but I think one should consider that.
So let us now come to the demonstration. The demonstration is, in a very general way,
the same as the Aristotelian demonstration—a demonstration called in the Middle Ages a
demonstration of the existence of God taken from the fact of motion, movement. But the
Platonic proof is indeed very different from the Aristotelian one in every detail. He
begins with a distinction of various kinds of motion. One of these kinds of motion is
coming into being, in Greek, genesis. Let us read at the beginning of 894, page 329.
Reader:
[Ath.:] “And what is the condition which must occur in everything to bring about
generation?”vii
LS: More literally translated, “the coming into being of all comes into being.” That is a
neat statement of the problem. You see it. Now let us take the old question. Either there is
eternal motion—motion as motion has never come into being, but if motion has come
into being, there was a motion which brought into being motion. Now let us begin again
with the reading of this sentence.
Reader:
“And what is the condition which must occur in everything to bring about generation?
Obviously whenever a starting-principle receiving increase comes to the second change,
and from this to the next, and on coming to the third admits of perceptions by percipients.
vii

Here the Stranger is posing himself questions and answering them while the others listen.

353
Everything comes into being by this process of change and alteration; and a thing is
really existent whenever it remains fixed, but when it changes into another constitution it
is utterly destroyed.” (893e-894a)
LS: Let us stop here. Now first there is this question of the genesis of genesis, of the
coming into being of coming into being. And this is replaced in the sequel by the genesis
of everything, which excludes, I believe, a genesis of genesis, a coming into being of
coming into being. Coming into being is always: that is, I believe, the implication.
Secondly, he makes here the remark that a thing is truly only if it rests, to the extent to
which it does not change. What is the meaning of that? Now you see here three stages of
the coming into being, and this is understood by the commentators, rightly I believe, as
the three dimensions: the line, the circle, and the body; and only in the latter case is it
possible that there are perceivers. If there were no bodies, no three-dimensional things,
there could not be perceivers of sensually perceivable things. What is he driving at here?
You see, we started from this premise of the opponents, that there are such things as the
four elements—say, atoms; it doesn’t make the slightest difference. These atoms are
primeval and always, and they are endowed with certain motions. Out of these motions
the visible universe grows. The first step in Plato’s argument, to the extent to which I
understand it, is this: that he says before we talk about all these things, we must look at
motion in general and distinguish the various kinds of motion. What you do is to treat all
these different kinds of motion without making this distinction, the distinction between
coming into being, between growth, between change of qualities, and finally locomotion.
Now what Plato has in mind here, I think, although I cannot make it stick now, is this: the
old story, the thing, the four elements, or something of this sort. But how to understand a
thing, say, a dog? It is very well to say the dog came into being out of the four elements,
but the dog is not sufficiently understood as four elements, or a combination of four
elements. This is, I think, the basic premise of the whole analysis. Now after having made
this distinction between the various kinds of motion, he says there is one of special
importance, and this is self-motion. All kinds of motion which are not self-motion means
a body is moved by another body. There are also motions which originate within the body
itself. And Plato contends that self-motion is primary, and everything turns around that.
Student: Does he beg the question when he says that self-motion is not promoted by
other bodies?
LS: The question is: Is there self-motion? I think that Plato argues as follows. If there is
to be a beginning of motion, it can be found only in the self-moving thing. That I believe
is what he is driving at. Let us first read 894e, the speech of the Athenian beginning there.
Reader:
[Ath.:] This: when we find one thing changing another, and this in turn another, and so
on,—of these things shall we ever find one that is the prime cause of change?
LS: Literally translated, “a first.”
Reader:

354
How will a thing that is moved by another ever be itself the first of the things that cause
change? It is impossible. But when a thing that has moved itself changes another thing,
and that other a third, and the motion thus spreads progressively through thousands upon
thousands of things, will the primary source of all their motions be any else than the
movement of that which has moved itself? (894e-895a)
LS: I think that is the central part of the argument. I repeat, it is based on one premise: if
there is to be a beginning of motion, that can be found only in a self-moving thing. Now
let us see whether that is true, that is, to make the distinction between self-moving and
moved things.
Student: Does this not assume that the distinction between self-moving things and things
which are simply moved by another is on the same level, is the same kind of motion as
the other eight?
LS: No, no. They are explicitly distinguished as kinds of motion.
Student: Yes, as all-comprehensive?
LS: Yes, the distinction is represented as all-comprehensive. There are n kinds of motion,
but we can divide them into two fundamental kinds: self-motion and moved by others.
Now he says that self-motion has primacy, and primacy not only in rank but also in time.
The argument is this: if there is a beginning of motion, the beginning can be found only
in a self-moving thing.
Student: But this is the very thesis I am attacking. It seems to me that the question if
there is a beginning is irrelevant; right here it is irrelevant. Because if the motion,
whether it is eternal or not, is of the kind which is not self-moving, then it means
therefore that somehow or other, however you conceive it, there must be a self-moving
motion causing that in some way or other.
LS: Now what are the alternatives? It is very well to attack Plato, and we should do that
by all means. But first we must try to understand what he means.
Student: I think this is what he means.
LS: And what then would be your objection, precisely?
Student: I am objecting to your saying that in his argument is the basic premise that if
there is a beginning of motion, then a self-moved mover must be responsible for it some
way or other. Now the thing I’m saying is that this is unnecessary. If all motion, whether
eternal or not, is comprehensible as being moved motion—the motion here that we see—
then there must somehow exist outside of this a self-moved motion. And the question is
not whether motion is eternal but whether if the motion which is comprehensible with
being or coextensive with being is moved motion or not. That is what the question is.

355
LS: You mean that we can discuss it with entire independence of the question of eternity
or beginning of motion. All right, how does the argument run? How do you make it stick
that of the two, let us assume that we find both moved motion—and we see [this] all the
time—and that there is also such a thing as self-moving motion? He assumes that this
exists. But now how do you establish the primacy of self-moved motion?
Student: The way he establishes it, that if there is moved motion—whether this moved
motion is eternal or not is out of the question—if it is moved motion, then somehow,
eternally or in the beginning of time if it is temporal, there is a self-moved motion
responsible for it.
LS: But I don’t see how he proves that. How do you prove it?
Student: The question then is: Is the whole of being to be characterized as moved
motion?
LS: I don’t quite recognize in that the Platonic formulation, although that is a minor
consideration. Why could it not be? Let us assume that this is what the opponents say,
that all motion is moved motion. In other words, whenever a body or a particle of a body
moves, it is moved by another moved thing, and so on ad infinitum. By the way, ad
infinitum raises already the question of beginning or end, but I don’t want to pursue that.
But how does Plato argue against this? Why must this originate, this whole change for
thousands and thousands of years, originate in a self-moved thing?
Student: Well, I hate to say “by definition.” I mean, he is talking now about the whole,
whether this whole is conceived of in infinite extension or not. He is talking about the
whole being characterized by moved motion. And then if this is true, must there not be
[self-moved motion]? Moved motion is simply insufficient to account for itself.
LS: But how to show that? How does he show it? I mean, the only argument that I was
able to discover in the course of my present reading, which is of course not good enough,
is this: that if there is to be a beginning of motion, then it can only be found in a selfmoving being and not in a moved thing. Because, you know, the thing that is moved by
something other than itself has the origin of its motion in the motion of another thing, and
you go on ad infinitum. If you arrive at something which has a movement in itself, then
you can rightly say that you have arrived at the first motion. What Plato seems to say is
this: any first motion must be the motion of a self-moved body. In order to indicate the
difficulty, let us remember how the things were at least in the earlier development of
modern philosophy of science. If you have an inert matter, then the question arises:
Where does the movement come from? That was the objection of Spinoza to Descartes,
by the way. And what did Spinoza say? And this, by the way, was the answer given later
on by everyone: That is wrong to understand matter as unmoved. Matter is essentially
motion. Or if we go back to the Platonic examples of the four elements: the four
elements, or atoms, whatever we call them, are as such in motion. Now if the atom is in
itself moved, then it would be self-moving. This grave assertion that the self-moving, that
which has the origin of motion in itself, is necessarily so, is in addition a very great

356
difficulty, a difficulty which is in a very cavalier way disposed of here. I don’t mean to
say that Plato did not mean something very serious by making the distinction between
self-moved and moved by others, and that he was linking up the self-moved with the
soul. He meant that. I am now concerned only with the argument. And I see now more
clearly why I agreed with you when you read your paper and why I was not sure whether
I could fully agree with you, but I was glad that you put your finger on the point. The
whole argument is here linked up indeed with the question of coming into being, that is
clear. But I would now say more specifically that the question is now linked up with the
question of the beginning of coming into being. And that of course leads to a somewhat
narrower discussion, because the possibility of eternal motion is ruled out. I still believe
that. But we cannot solve this question now.
There must be a beginning of motion, if not in time. All motion presupposes a moved
thing which is not the product of movement. Even those people with the four elements
say these four elements have not come into being by genesis, there is no motion leading
to fire, air and water. And this substratum must have the origin of movement in itself.
But, as I say, this is a very great question whether you cannot conceive of these bodily
things as possessing movement in themselves. Certainly that is not disproved here. I think
the decisive step is taken in 895c, which we can read. This is again a dialogue (page 335).
Reader:
[Ath.:] Now that we have come to this point in our discourse, here is a question we may
answer.
[Clin.:] What is it?
[Ath.:] If we should see that this motion had arisen in a thing of earth or water or fire,
whether separate or in combination, what condition should we say exists in such a thing?
[Clin.:] What you ask me is, whether we are to speak of a thing as “alive” when it moves
itself?
[Ath.:] Yes.
[Clin.:] It is alive, to be sure.
[Ath.:] Well, then, when we see soul in things, must we not equally agree that they are
alive?
[Clin.:] We must.
[Ath.:] Now stop a moment, in Heaven’s name!— (895b-d)
LS: You see, another sermon. Now the argument—which is developed at much greater
length in the sequel, although without adding to the crucial point—is this: Whatever has
the principle of movement in itself is living, that is to say, it has a soul; and this is the
proof of the primacy of the animate compared with the inanimate. This, I think, is the
nerve of the argument. To repeat: if there is to be a beginning of motion, it can only be
found in a self-moving thing. But to be self-moving means to be living, i.e., to be
animate, to have a soul. Hence the primacy of the soul. Obviously this argument requires
a very long discussion, which is not given here, in order to make it stick.
Student: Well, do you think that by “animate” here he means simply energy, or does he
mean something much more?

357

LS: The term “energy” doesn’t appear.
Student: But I am trying to fit it into how we think about these things.
LS: Energy as energy is also inanimate.
Student: Energy is animate for Plato?
LS: If there were such a thing as energy in Plato. Well, he speaks of four principles: fire,
water, air and earth. You can replace this by any other principles of the same kind: atoms,
and however you understand the atoms; it doesn’t make any difference. The main point is
that they are meant to be inanimate. And the assertion is that these inanimate things are
the principles of everything animate—and especially of man, and especially of the mind.
That is the assertion vulgarly known as materialism.
Student: As what?
LS: Materialism.
Student: The inanimate things are prior to animate?
LS: Yes, and that they explain the animate things and the mind.
Student: I am just trying to see how this problem arose in the first place.
LS: But what will you do? Either you assert the eternity of the human race, you see, then
the question of the origin of man doesn’t arise. But if you consider it possible that man
has come into being, then the question arises: Out of what? Clearly out of non-man. Now
what would that be? The same reasons which make men inclined to believe that the
human race has come into being make them inclined to believe that all animate things
have come into being. So then you go back to inanimate elements, something inanimate
out of which everything else has grown. The question which you raise is a very
reasonable one. Why should we assume [that]? But it seems for some reason that the first
efforts of the human mind to give such accounts all turn to [the] inanimate as the ground
for everything else. And that this is somehow connected with Socrates, Plato, and
Aristotle, that this was changed, you know. But that would lead us now really too far.
Here we are confronted with a historical fact that a materialistic approach prevailed prior
to Socrates, was regarded as [true]11 and at the same time degrading, and here he
discusses it and tries to refute it. And the simple counterassertion is that soul is primary
as compared with the body. “Body” means of course not the organic body but these
bodily things like fire, and earth, and atoms.
Student: I was wondering how Plato’s argument would hold up against Hobbes’
comment about motion being the cause of itself, or that motion moves itself and
therefore, according to Plato, motion would be alive.

358

LS: No, Hobbes tried to establish a materialism of the strictest kind.
Student: Yes, but what Plato is saying here is that whatever is moved is alive, or . . .
LS: Sure, that is a very difficult . . . but to get rid of Hobbes is extremely simple, I must
say, because what one has to read is not his very emphatic statements, e.g., to be means to
be a body and all these famous remarks in the Leviathan and so on, but rather one has to
go into the precise analysis which he gives in his book on the body, De Corpore. What is
that body? What is that body which is moved? That is the question which he raises there.
Movement is movement of bodies, and there is nothing but movement of bodies, that is
what Hobbes says. Even a thought of man is a movement of the body, and he says all
these nasty things in order to prove that, but I do not want to go into that. The question is:
What is body? What is that which is underlying any motion? Of course it must be the
product of previous motion, you know, it cannot be self-explanatory. It must be explained
itself in terms of body. Then you have to go back ultimately to some particles. Yes, but
no new difficulties arise here for Hobbes. The end result of this very complicated thing,
which Hobbes did not prove, I am afraid, is that these particles are ultimately postulates
of the thinking mind in order to give a convenient account. They are mere postulates, and
thus the Hobbean materialism dissolves itself eventually into a kind of methodological
doctrine of science. That is the difficulty. Hobbes was no longer an ancient materialist.
They didn’t say,” These are postulates”; [they said], “I can show you fire, water, air and
so on and,” they would assert, “I can show you that if you do not have recourse to them
you will not understand anything.” But let us come back to this point.
In the immediate sequel he says the word “soul” means the same thing as what in the
form of a sentence reads: “the moved thing which is able to move itself.” Self-moving
and soul are the same thing. The conclusion: but if the soul is prior to the body, then such
things as art and law are of course also prior to the body. Law, rather than what these
other people say, is nature, meaning the originating principle. Now we get into deep
water, and that is decisive for the rest of the argument. Today’s report referred to it, but I
don’t think the reporter understood the bearing of it. 896d5 to e7.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Must we then necessarily agree, in the next place, that soul is the cause of things
good and bad, fair and foul, just and unjust, and all the opposites, if we are to assume it to
be the cause of all things?
LS: No, that follows necessarily, I trust. Once we have proven that soul is the cause of
everything, it is of course also the cause of good as well as of bad, of the just as well as
the unjust.
Reader:
[Clin.:] Of course we must.
[Ath.:] And as soul thus controls and indwells in all things everywhere that are moved,
must we not necessariliy affirm that it controls Heaven also?

359
[Clin.:] Yes.
[Ath.:] One soul, is it, or several? I will answer for you—“several.” Anyhow, let us
assume not less than two—the beneficent soul and that which is capable of effecting
results of the opposite kind.
[Clin.:] You are perfectly right. (896d-e)
LS: Now that is crucial, and that is one of the most controversial passages in Plato’s
work: the assertion of a bad soul and, as people usually say or sometimes say, the bad
world soul—dualism, manichaeism, and the whole story. There is no question that here
this is asserted, whatever Plato says in the Timaeus and other passages, and we have to
try to understand that and its meaning here. The cause of everything is soul. But since
everything consists of two opposite classes, good and bad, just and unjust, there must be
at least two causes, a cause of the good and a cause of the bad. Now since the cause is
admitted to be soul, there must be a good soul responsible for the good things and a bad
soul responsible for the bad things. By the way, there is a certain agreement between that
and the Republic, because in the second book of the Republic it is explicitly said—there
he speaks of God and not of the soul—that God is the cause only of the good. But then
the question arises: What is the cause of evil? The answer given in the second book of the
Republic is sin. Fundamentally it is the biblical argument: sin, human fault. But there are
great difficulties to this explanation in the Republic itself, as I cannot possibly show now
because we must go on. In the Laws he gives this answer: the cause of evil is a
suprahuman bad soul. And he doesn’t say it has become bad by a fall; it is so by itself.
Someone wanted to say something?
Student: Well, he defines soul as self-movement, and this is how he got things going in
the first place. We have gotten to that. But now we find ourselves with two souls . . .
LS: We find later on even more than that.
Student: But here the question arises, which of these is higher in rank.
LS: Oh, that he answers. You see, the trouble is—well, take Socrates’s Apology.12 [They]
had a thing—you know, when they made their defense speech—there was a kind of
watch which showed them when the time was up, the time when he could no longer
defend himself. And Socrates said how disgraceful it is: We talk about the most
important subject and a watch is there which compels us to close for no other reason
except that the time is up, and yet we are not through with our discussion. Although we
are, fortunately, not in a criminal court here, still we also have to consider the time;
therefore it is impossible now to solve this problem. I can only repeat what I believe to be
the crucial argument. If there is to be a beginning of motion, there must be self-moved
things. But self-moved things are as such necessarily soul. Hence the beginning of all
movement is soul, or souls. With that we must now close this discussion, not because it is
closed, but for this silly reason. But we want to understand it better and should.
Now the next step is: One soul will not do; we need at least two souls because there are
opposite things, good things and bad things. Now in the sequel he develops this point:

360
What is it which makes the soul good or bad? There is no question: the mind or
mindlessness. The thoughtful soul is the cause of all good, and an ignorant or stupid soul
is the cause of all evil. Thoughtlessness is as much a possible quality of soul as
thoughtfulness. Of a stone we do not really say in strict speech that it is thoughtless; it is
beyond that level where it would apply to it. Now this leads to a grave consequence.
Nous, mind, intelligence, is not the cause of everything. There is an independent cause of
evil: that is the soul which is connected with thoughtlessness. Then the question arises,
which was raised by Mr. ____: Which of these two souls or of these two kinds of souls
rules the whole? The answer given is: the good one, because of the visible order. And that
I think is crucial for the understanding. The soul which rules the whole is the
predominant [one]; it doesn’t mean that it rules everything. The notion suggested is this:
an ordered whole which as a whole is reasonable and ordered, but within which a
disordering element exists and has power. We can perhaps read 898a10 to c, page 345.
Reader:
[Ath.:] If we described them both as moving regularly and uniformly in the same spot,
round the same things and in relation to the same things, according to one rule and
system—reason, namely, and the motion that spins in one place (likened to the spinning
of a turned globe),—we should never be in danger of being deemed unskillful in the
construction of fair images by speech.
[Clin.:] Most true.
[Ath.:] On the other hand, will not the motion that is never uniform or regular or in the
same place or around or in relation to the same things, not moving in one spot nor in any
order or system or rule—will not this motion be akin to absolute unreason?
[Clin.:] It will, in very truth.
[Ath.:] So now there is no longer any difficulty in stating expressly that, inasmuch as soul
is what we find driving everything round, we must affirm that this circumference of
Heaven is of necessity driven round under the care and ordering of either the best soul or
its opposite.
[Clin.:] But, Stranger, judging by what has now been said, it is actually impious to make
any other assertion than that these things are drivieni round by one or more souls
endowed with all goodness. (898a-c)
LS: So in other words, the cosmic motion as a whole is ordered and sensible, but within
this whole there is also a root of disorder which is subordinate [to] but not controlled by
the best soul. And this dualism is really a part of Plato’s doctrine. In the Timaeus he seeks
for a cause of all the irrationality and disorderliness, and he doesn’t call it there a soul.
That is another consideration. But there is an independent and irreducible cause of
irrationality. If we use the language of Aristotle or of later Aristotelians, there is this
distinction: there is something like matter and matter which is the cause of evil—the old
story—which is not controllable by reason completely, and which is ultimately the cause
of all evil, including of course human evil. We cannot go into the sequel, but in the
immediate sequel the consequence is very simple: he tries to show them that the stars are
animate beings, and therefore they are gods. We are now back at the beginning. This
much about the discussion of the existence of the gods.

361
Now we come to the discussion of providence. I can only say this. The whole argument
regarding providence is based on a complete silence regarding that other principle, the
bad soul. The argument is based on the disregard of that, that is to say, it is essentially
defective, and that I think explains the silence, the strange silence, about providence at
the beginning of the book,viii in 885d, to which I drew your attention. Now13 the problem
of providence is of course a simple one: the prosperity of the wicked and the misery of
the good. This is argued out on the basis of the premise that the gods are good. How can
there be prosperity of the wicked and misery of the good? He excludes that the gods
could be careless, neglectful, or cowardly, or lazy. If the gods have all the virtues, there
must be providence. And then of course, the question arises: What about the prosperity of
the wicked? And he takes care of that. But I can only say this: you will look in vain for an
assertion of omnipotence. Omniscience is granted in 901d, but no omnipotence proper,
and there are quite a few references to that.
Student: What about 901, toward the end, where he says, “And do you admit also that
they have,” meaning the gods, “all power which mortals can have”?
LS: Well, “can” have. How do you know that they can have all power, omnipotence? But
if you take, for example, 902e8 or 902, 14 he uses the superlative regarding wisdom. But
later on, when he speaks of willing and being able to, power, he does not use the
superlative. And I would say necessarily so, because if there is such a principle of evil
which can only be subordinated but which cannot be eradicated, there cannot be
omnipotence.
One would have to go over this whole thing, carefully considering, and really considering
carefully [and distinguishing] between powerful or potent and omnipotent. Omnipotence
is not asserted. Then one must expect that there will be always evil, and evil not due to
guilt but due to the nature of things. And I think that was Plato’s view. In some myths he
presents it differently; for example, in the tenth book of the Republic, the guilt is that of
the chooser. God is guiltless, the guilt is of the chooser. But the question arises, then:
Why does the chooser choose as he chooses? Is this due entirely to choice, or is it not
connected with his physis, with his nature and so on? The whole problem is of course
involved in that.
And then I would like to mention this. In 903 to 904 he gives an explicit myth which
explains the prosperity of the wicked and the misery of the just: the concern is the
blessedness of the whole and not of the part. Hence we can say the unhappiness of the
individual is not an important consideration. It is something like Leibnitz’s notion, who
under entirely different conditions said that we must be good citizens in the city of god:
that is true wisdom and true serenity. ix And that means to recognize the necessity of evil.
It amounts to that in Leibnitz. And then we see that this world is really the best possible
viii

Book 10.
See his Discourse on Metaphysics, especially section 36: “God is the monarch of the most
perfect republic composed of all the spirits, and the happiness of this city of God is his principal
purpose.”
ix

362
world, because if there were no evil in it, all the good which exists would also not be
possible. The myth otherwise says, of course—he speaks [of] the ease which is afforded
to the doubter by the doctrine of transmigration or immortality. In other words, a just man
who is at present unhappy may very well be happy in the next incarnation. Let us look at
905b (bottom, page 369), in the midst of a long speech by the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And the same rule, let me tell thee, will apply also to those whom thou sawest
growing to great estate from small after doing acts of impiety or other such evil,—
concerning whom thou didst deem that they had risen from misery to happiness, and didst
imagine, therefore, that in their actions, as in mirrors, thou didst behold the entire neglect
of the gods, not knowing of their joint contribution and how it contributes to the All.
(905b-c)
LS: The joint contribution, I would say, even of the wicked to the whole, of which they
of course are absolutely unaware. They think only of themselves.
Well, I must say a word about the laws regarding these problems because it is—that the
gods cannot be bribed is relatively short, and that is a fairly simple thing. That follows
necessarily. If the gods are of any respectability, they cannot be bribed, that goes without
saying. But what about the laws regarding impiety? Now there are two types of atheists.
We take first the atheists and then those who deny providence. As to the two types of
atheists, the first are just men and the second are unjust men, but clever unjust men (908b
to e). But then it is somewhat changed. The first are characterized by open speech: they
say everything and [are] mockers at the same time; and the others are so-called gifted
men, embracing soothsayers as well as sophists. And he divides these latter, of which
there are many kinds, into two most important kinds: the ironical men and the non-named
type. The non-named of these go to jail. For the ironical that is very strange (908d to e).
Let us read that.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Of these there may be many kinds; but those which call for legislation are two, of
which the “ironic” kind commits sins that deserve not one death only or two, while the
other kind requires both admonition and imprisonment. (908d-e)
LS: Now this is all he says about it. How are the ironical people to be punished? He says
only15 what they will not be punished [with]: not with one death nor with two deaths, but
with what?
Student: With three deaths?
LS: That could be, but he doesn’t say it. You can also say no deaths; that is also neither
one of them. It is left open. So in other words, Plato is not quite as savage as some people
have presented him. And then he speaks of the types of the other deniers, and he
distinguished them into two classes: those who are characterized by blindness, without
viciousness; and then those who are bestial. Those who are blind without viciousness get

363
five years in the reformatory, and if they do not recant after the five years, they will be
killed. And the others get lifelong imprisonment. So there is no question that there are
penal provisions in Plato’s Laws for unbelievers of various kinds, but it is not quite so
hard and fast as it would look at a first reading.
But the main point, and with this I return to something I said at the beginning of this
course, is this: the whole thing makes very much sense if we assume that it is Socrates
who is talking here. The speaker has so many qualities in common with Socrates:
Socrates, who has followed the advice of some of his friends and left jail but has not
followed the advice to go to Thessaly, where Meno and those wholly lawless follows
live, but [has chosen] rather to go to Crete, a lawabiding country, and become there the
benefactor of these somewhat backwardish people. And thinking of course of the
problem of his own fate and what could happen, he is also reforming the legislation
regarding impiety, because Socrates was condemned for impiety. There are rude laws
against impiety, but the most obvious change is this: No one is here put to death for
merely not believing in the gods worshipped by the city. The gods which have to be
accepted are the gods of the universe. In other words, a rational or natural theology, at
least ostensibly or explicitly, is to take the place of the merely civil theology. And in
addition, the punishments are a bit more humane. You see, no one is put to death
immediately; they are given an opportunity to learn better in these reformatories and the
other place—I don’t remember now how he calls it—which is in a somewhat more
savage country, befitting their state of thought, until they recant.

1

Deleted “when.”
Deleted “of.”
3
Deleted “it.”
4
Deleted “says.”
5
Deleted “reflex.”
6
Deleted “and”
7
Deleted “to.”
8
Deleted “to.”
9
Deleted “to.”
10
Moved “wrongly.”
11
Deleted “untrue.”
12
Deleted “that.”
13
Deleted “about.”
14
Deleted “where.”
15
Moved “with.”
2

364
Session 14: March 3, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —good job of reporting and you had in a way the most
difficult book,i because in all the other books there was a big theme which was visible at
a first reading, and here there seems to be a dispersal of material. ii I cannot blame you
for not having been able to go beyond this general statement that the eleventh book is
chiefly negative. I believe one can do better than that, but it is at least an attempt to give
an overall characterization of the book. And I also appreciated that you put together, or
tried to find at least one broader theme among the many smaller themes by concentrating
on the question of death penalties, this way to arrive at a deeper stratum of the problem.
There are so many things where one can go deeper. For example, you mentioned the fact
that a subject was dropped—an interesting subject, I would say—was dropped without
further consideration, namely, that since trade is such a dangerous occupation and
manifestly necessary and in itself beneficent, the most virtuous members of the
community should become traders. And it would have been an interesting subject to see
why it was dropped; it would have been worthwhile to go into that.
But I would suggest this general remark about the eleventh book. I would say it is the
least orderly book in the whole work, and I will later try to prove that. And even if one
follows your presentation, one could see this jumping from one subject to the other
without a principle of transition. And at the same time, it seems to me, at any rate, to be
the most moving book, I mean on a very simple level. For example, the statement about
orphans, and the statement about the aged parents. I don’t believe there is a parallel to
that in its simple moving character. Now I would try to link this up with the subject
matter of the preceding book, the book on the gods, on providence. Now these themes,
the aged parents, or parents and the orphans, are perhaps the most striking cases of
helpless people. The Roman word pietas which is underlined, piety, has also this
implication in particular. You know, piety in Latin, that is also applied toward parents. It
seems that Plato is here somehow dealing with the human or humane rules, if one can put
it this way, of religious feelings proper. But that is a mere guess and a mere tentative
suggestion. The question of order or lack of order is more amenable to treatment here.
For example, and this almost appears from your presentation, he discusses first divorce
and then immediately afterward poison. And it is of course easy to find connections via
pills—ou know, the subject pills, which could fill both. There is, I think, only one clear
distinction made in the book of subject matter. Let us look first at the beginning of the
book.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In the next place our business transations one with another will require proper
regulation. (913a)
LS: And now let us turn in your translation to page 419, 922a.
i

Book 11.
Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was
not recorded.
ii

365

Reader:
[Ath.:] We have now made regulations for most of the more important business dealings
between man and man, excepting those regarding orphans and the care of orphans by
their guardians; so, after those now dealt with, these matters must necessarily receive
some kind of regulation. (922a)
LS: So orphans—and orphans are also a property question, i.e., the property of the
orphan—seem here to be presented as a subdivision of business relations. But one could
also say on the basis of the gravity of the matter that this is the second great subject.
Business relations first, and then orphans. That is the only important distinction of subject
matter, of order, reference to order made in the book. But it is very complicated. If we
turn, for example, in order to look at the order of the subject matter coherently, to the
subjects, the first subject is treasure; then he goes over or switches to the subject [of]
things found. Now treasures are of course not strictly speaking found. You have to dig in
order to see whether there is anything to find. But what is common to treasure and things
found?
Student: They belong to someone else.
LS: Yes, but in robbery also you take away someone else’s. What is the characteristic of
treasures and things found?
Student: The worth is not in proportion to the effort expended.
LS: Well, in the case of the thing found there is no effort except perhaps to stoop down
and pick up this thousand-dollar bill, or whatever it may be, so that can’t be the common
thing. What is the difference between treasures and things found on the one hand and,
say, property which is stolen on the other?
Student: You don’t know who the original owner is in the case of treasure and things
found.
LS: Yes, that is true, but I think there is something else, something connected with what
you mean, but there is something else: because it has no known owner, it is less watched,
less protected. The lost thing is not protected at all because the owner may not know that
he lost it, and if he has lost it he doesn’t know where. It is unprotected. The things which
are still in his property are somehow subject to his looking for them at the right place.
Now he turns after that to slaves and free men, especially slaves first. Slaves are also
property. But what is the characteristic of slaves as property as distinguished, say, from
some household utensils?
Student: Alive.
LS: It is alive, surely. But looking at it from a harsh property angle.

366

Student: It is more closely watched.
LS: A slave is more closely watched, surely. But what does it have in common? What
connects the slave with the thing lost and distinguishes him from the household utensil?
The slave has a tendency to run away. You know, the protection is here particularly
difficult, since a human being is much cleverer about that than a sheep or [an] ox would
be. In other words, his willingness to run away and the ability to run away is a transition
to the things which have run away, as it were, without any hope of recovery except by
mere accident. I just want to show you that there is some connection. One only has to
think about it.
Now the second great subject, as I said, is orphans and guardians, especially orphans.
Then there is a transition not explicitly made to another great subject, the relation
between parents and children, husbands and wives, but with the greatest emphasis on
aged parents and grandparents. So orphans and these aged parents stand out as the great
theme in the center of the book, and they deal with human beings who are particularly
helpless and therefore in need of a much higher degree of justice on the part of the others
who are connected with them. Piety, pietas in the Roman sense, is the great theme in the
center of the book. Up to this point the order is tolerably clear, but then we come into a
complete mess. He begins with sorcery and witchcraft, then turns to violence, verbal
injuries, madmen, again verbal injuries, beggars, damage done by one’s property—slaves
and beasts—and finally witnesses and pleading. But if we look more closely, we see this:
sorcery and witchcraft come first; in other words, one can say superstition in opposition
to genuine piety. Then he goes over to madmen. I know that the first subject is violence,
but I will bring this in later. The connection between sorcery, witchcraft, and madmen is
also clear considering the religious interpretation of madness which existed in classical
antiquity. As for the subject of violence, 1 [it] then leads to other forms of injury, namely,
verbal injury, and the special theme there is ridiculing fellow citizens—[an] explicit
reference to comedy. So you see, you have now up to this point these recognizable
subjects: sorcery, witchcraft, madness, comedy. The next subject is beggars. Do you see
any connection between comedy and beggars? The first word of the section dealing with
beggars is pity, or compassion. Does this ring a bell?
Student: It reminds of Aristophanes and . . .
LS: But where did Aristophanes get these beggars from?
Student: Euripides.
LS: And Euripides wrote what kind of themes?
Student: Tragedy.
LS: And does tragedy have something to do with compassion or pity? Aristotle says it
does. So in other words, objects of pity are the natural transition from the objects of

367
ridicule. Then he goes over to the subject [of] damage done by one’s property, in the first
place by slaves. Do you see a connection between the preceding subjects, objects of
compassion, beggars, and slaves?
Student: Well, there is a certain connection between the slave who damages property and
the beggar who kind of gets property through persuasion.
LS: No, but the simple subject slaves without any specialty, is it not related to the
preceding subject? What would you do if you would suddenly come into a region where
slavery is practiced? What would be your action?
Student: Pity the slaves.
LS: Surely. This simple feeling—which was so beautifully expressed in certain words of
Lincoln—of compassion for slaves, that is not a privilege of modern times. I mean, this
simple feeling of pity for people exposed, perhaps without any guilt or fault of their own
but mere ill luck, a lost battle, or whatever it may be, is clear. One has only to read
Homer and read what Andromache says about her probable fate when Troy will be
captured—she will be a slave woman somewhere in Greece—to see that. We
overestimate the callousness of thoughtful men of former times. I can illustrate it by an
example which always made an impression on me. A modern romantic writer—in these
histories of literature I see he is called a realist—Flaubert, wrote a novel, Salammbô,
dealing with Carthage at the time after the first Punic War. Hannibal was a young boy of
ten or eleven, and the enemies of his father, Hamilcar, tried to hurt Hamilcar where it
hurts. Hamilcar had only one son, Hannibal; and so they arranged a big celebration in
honor of Baal, the celebration to consist of the sacrifice of the first born son. That meant
Hannibal. Hamilcar of course did not give in so easily, and so he went with his bailiff to
the slave quarters and looked for a boy who was more or less of Hannibal’s age and size,
and he picked him; and he was of course burned properly according to the required ritual.
But the interesting thing is this. When the slave mother saw that her boy was taken away
and she was sure that it was for no good purpose, she became what they now call
hysterical. She cried and so on and so on, and then there is a beautiful sentence which
shows the soul of the modern romantic. Hamilcar never had given it a moment’s thought
that this was a feeling being. No, she was a piece of property. And you can easily see
how Flaubert enjoyed this alternative kind of human beings, wholly unimaginable in
modern times: Hamilcar, who doesn’t even dream of such a possibility. Now that is a
modern romantic’s version. Naturally, there were masters in the past who didn’t know
that, but Plato was not such a man, and quite a few others too: all the poets knew that.
And so I think there is really a connection here between these two subjects.
We have seen then objects of pity, and that means somehow tragedy, and then we
understand immediately the last subject, witnesses and pleading, where explicit reference
is made to the art of forensic rhetoric. So what I am suggesting is this: that while Plato
was compelled by his enterprise to write a complete legal code and thus had to go into all
kinds of things that were terribly boring to him, he couldn’t help enlivening them by
some more interesting considerations, some of which I believe can be discovered without

368
too great difficulty. So now let us turn to the most important passages within the book,
unless someone has a question regarding the subject of the order in book 11. It is a fact
that only comedy and forensic rhetoric are mentioned: tragedy is not mentioned. What
that means is a long question. Perhaps we get nevertheless some very interesting material
about tragedy from this very book, but that we must see.
Now let us first see in 913b5, close to the beginning: he makes a distinction between the
virtue of the soul on the one hand, and a right on the other. He says: “as it will increase in
virtue of soul and in justice.”iii Not quite correct, not literal enough, but it is tolerable.
Why is justice not virtue of soul? In Farabi’s Plato, paragraph 30, this same distinction
occurs, exactly the same. I believe that . . . I don’t recall any other Platonic passage where
such a clear distinction is made between the virtue of the soul and right, or justice. Can
you interpret that? Can you understand that? Why is justice not a virtue of the soul?
Student: Perhaps he is alluding to a justice which we would not call the moral justice but
a political justice, a distribution of material goods rather than a distribution of parts of the
soul.
LS: That goes, I think, in the right direction. One could perhaps state it as follows. The
official definition of justice given in the Republic is minding one’s own business. And
this is, first of all, a political definition: doing one’s own job properly in a well-ordered
society, where the function would necessarily be salutary, a reasonable function. This
definition is, however, meant to be universally valid, i.e., not only in the best society but
also in other societies, for the individual. And here minding one’s own business is a
purely private, if one can use that term, quality of the individual. And it has no primary
relation to social matters. The fact that justice is the social virtue is certainly implied in
that.
But now there comes (we cannot read everything, of course) the problem of adulteration
and deception. That I think calls for some attention (916d6, page 401). I think we will
just begin with the paragraph on that page.
Reader:
[Ath.:] He that exchanges for money either money or anything else, living or not living,
shall give and receive every such article unadulterated, conforming to the law; and
touching all knavery of this sort, as in the case of other laws, let us hearken to a prelude.
Adulteration should be regarded by every man as coming under the same head as
falsehood and fraud—a class of actions concerning which the mob are wont to say,
wrongly, that any such action will generally be right if it be done opportunely: but the
proper “opportunity,” the when and the where, they leave unprescribed and undefined, so
that by this saying they often bring loss both to themselves and to others. But it is not
fitting for the lawgiver to leave this matter undefined; he must always declare clearly the
limitations, great or small, and this shall now be done:—No man, calling the gods to
witness, shall commit, either by word or deed, any falsehood, fraud or adulteration, if he
iii Presumably Strauss’s translation.

369
does not mean to be the most hateful to the gods; and such an one is he who without
regard of the gods swears oaths falsely, and he also who lies in the presence of his
superiors. Now the better are the superiors of the worse, and the older in general of the
younger; wherefore also parents are superior to their offspring, men to women and
children, rulers to ruled. And it will be proper for all to revere in all these classes of
superiors, whether they be in other positions of authority or in offices of State above all;
and to enforce this is just the purpose of our present discourse. For everybody who
adulterates any market commodity, lies and deceives and, calling Heaven to witness,
takes an oath in front of the laws and cautions of the market-stewards, neither regarding
men nor revering gods. Certainly it is a good practice to refrain from sullying lightly
divine names, and to behave with such purity and holiness as most of us generally exhibit
in matters of religion. (917a-b)
LS: Now let us stop here. Now why is this an important question, going beyond the mere
stipulation regarding honesty in business? I think no long argument is needed [for] why
the legislator must do something about the prevention of simple crooked actions in the
market place. The subject has a much broader meaning in Plato.
Student: He finds it subversive.
LS: But that goes without saying, that every crime has the potentiality of becoming a
cancer, every kind of crime in the body politic. But what is the broader, I mean the really
broad meaning of the subject?
Student: Is it that commercial transactions are essential to the life of the society?
LS: No, no. I mean, we must go beyond the commercial. That the commercial is an
essentially necessary thing is obvious; there is no interesting problem in that.
Student: Might it not have something to do with the fact that adulteration goes against
nature?
LS: No, he uses the broader term when he speaks there at the beginning. Adulteration,
and lie, and deception belong to one genus.
Student: They are all untruthful; there is an adulteration of the truth.
LS: And why is it such an important theme?
Student: How are you going to get to the truth?
LS: It is possible to give a very simple answer to this question. You don’t even need a
sentence: one expression which indicates the gravity of that problem in Plato.
Student: The truth is the good.

370
LS: Yes, but that doesn’t show the problem. Did you never hear of the noble lie? Plato
enlarges here the subject of adulteration by saying that adulteration and lie and deception
belong to the same genus. And you see the indication, which was quite strange (how does
he translate that toward the end of what you read?), that one should not take—it sounds
almost like one of the Ten Commandments—the names of the gods in vain.
Student: “sullying lightly divine names.”
LS: All right, but “sullying lightly,” so in other words, sullying non-lightly would be a
different story. Now how could one [put it], if one were trying to express it in terms of
the Ten Commandments? One should not take God’s name in vain on light occasions.
That you must admit is quite a problem. No, Plato thought of this problem here. We must
never forget that and not make Plato’s doctrine simpler than it is.
Now the next subject, related to this of course, is trade. And that is a very long section
and also partly very funny. I think we will try to read that, and perhaps omit some other
things (918a, page 405, the paragraph).
Reader:
[Ath.:] Following close upon practices of adulteration follow practices of retail trading;
concerning which—
LS: By the way, why does it follow close? Plato does not always spell out every
connection.
Student: Retail trading is practically a matter of cheating to begin with.
LS: That it is a matter of adulteration to begin with? What do you mean—if they give
you alcoholic beverages or wine, they dilute? It is fairly common there, you mean? Or is
it at least possible to be very common?
Student: He seems to mistrust every shopkeeper in the city.
LS: Yes, now let us see since that goes probably too far. Let us see what he has to say
about that.
Reader:
concerning which, as a whole, we shall first offer counsel and argument, and then impose
on it a law. The natural purpose for which all retail trading comes into existence in a State
is not loss, but precisely the opposite; for how can any man be anything but a benefactor
if he renders even and symmetrical the distribution of any kind of goods which before
was unsymmetrical and uneven? And this is, we must say, the effect produced by the
power of money, and we must declare that the merchant is ordained to this purpose.
(918a-b)

371
LS: Let us stop for one moment. One can say that goes even beyond Aristotle in
justifying trade. Why is it natural? Why is it according to nature? It is a very strong
statement for such an enemy of trade like Plato, or relatively such. Why is it natural? You
stated it here.
Student: . . .
LS: Can you illustrate this? Because without illustration one doesn’t understand practical
matters.
Student: Well, if the chicken farmer has too many chickens, he trades them to the
shoemaker.
LS: Now you could of course say, however, that this chicken farm is already a human
establishment, and there should only be mixed farms in the first place. So take something
where no human arrangements enter at all. Can you think of something?
Student: Well, you can’t grow fish on land . . .
LS: Or salt, and so on. So things are unevenly distributed, but men need these unevenly
distributed [things] in an even manner—that is to say, roughly speaking. You need salt
everywhere, and yet salt is not everywhere available. You need timber everywhere, but
not everywhere is timber available. So this natural unevenness, uneven distribution, and
the natural equality of human needs for these things makes trade indispensable and
rational. Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And the hireling and the innkeeper and the rest—some more and some less
respectable trades,—all have this function, namely, to provide all men with full
satisfaction of their needs and with evenness in their properties. Let us see then wherein
trade is reputed to be a thing not noble nor even respectable, and what has caused it to be
disparaged, in order that we may remedy by law parts of it at least, if not the whole. This
is an undertaking, it would seem, of no slight importance, and one that calls for no little
courage.
LS: I don’t know why he translates courage; “no little virtue.” That is already an
interpretation which is questionable—that courage should be the particular virtue
required here. Continue.
Reader:
[Clin.:] How do you mean?
[Ath.:] My dear Clinias, small is the class of men—rare by nature and trained, too, with a
superlative training—who, when they fall into divers needs and lusts, are able to stand
out firmly for moderation, and who, when they have the power of taking much wealth,
are sober, and choose what is of due measure rather than what is large. The disposition of
the mass of mankind is exactly the opposite of this; when they desire, they desire without

372
limit, and when they can make moderate gains, they prefer to gain insatiably; and it is
because of this that all the classes concerned with retail trade, commerce, and innkeeping are disparaged and subjected to violent abuse. Now if anyone were to do what
never will be done (Heaven forbid!)—but I shall make the supposition, ridiculous though
it is—namely, compel the best men everywhere for a certain period to keep inns or to
peddle or to carry on any such trade,—or even to compel women by some necessity of
fate to take part in such a mode of life,—then we should learn how that each of these
callings is friendly and desirable; and if all these callings were carried on according to a
rule free from corruption, they would be honoured with the honour which one pays to a
mother or a nurse. (918b-919a)
LS: All right. So in other words, since Plato was never afraid of making preposterous,
absurd, or ridiculous proposals, as he has shown in the Republic, why does he not come
up with this proposal that the most virtuous members of the community must engage for
some part of their lives in retail trade, because that is a particularly corrupting thing? As
the report points out, it is stated, but no reason is given why it is dropped. We must figure
out the reason. Why is it dropped, although it is such an eminently sensible proposal?
And the example which he will give in the sequel shows it beautifully. Why is it
dropped?
Student: Perhaps they would not be competent . . .
LS: We are speaking now of trade at home.
Student: . . .
LS: Well, do you believe that a very great degree of cleverness is required in order to
understand the quality of the merchandise, and so on?
Student: Well, not the quality of the merchandise . . .
LS: So that you don’t deceive anyone.
Student: In order to have the proper enterprise one must . . .
LS: But why should they have? I mean, Plato made it clear, perfectly clear, that no spirit
of enterprise is needed. There is this obvious need for a more even distribution, and this
must be done honestly. It is a great public function but a dangerous one, because the
temptation is so great to try to get more than one should have. Therefore, let us delegate
[it to] the most virtuous members of the community, say, people like you. After you get
your degree you have to go three years into the, say, second-hand car trade, which I
understand is in special need of some improvement, and thus to be honest and say that
this car has these and these defects, that it is not worth a thousand dollars but only two
hundred, and so on. So you improve the status of that trade immensely.
Student: But you might even abolish the trade.

373

LS: How?
Student: Well, if all of us honest people were to engage in the second-hand car trade and
tell the people honestly what the car was worth, then you would soon go broke. You
wouldn’t make any profit. There would be no more second-hand car dealers.
LS: I see. But still I don’t know, because there are still people who want to get rid of a
second-hand car. And if all second-hand car dealers were honest men, they might even
get what they get now but the buyers of them would get them much more cheaply. I do
not know whether the difficulty lies here.
Student: One of the problems would be that the satisfactions which occur as a result of a
day spent in trade do not fully occupy the talents of a very virtuous man.
LS: But take a farmer. This old question discussed—you know, there was a time when
there was a taboo on trade but especially on banking, which was at that time called not
banking but usury. And then some clever man said: What is the difference between
taking interest for money and taking interest from land? You know, that was a major
point in this discussion. And so if one looks at the problem without bias, why should the
activity of a farmer, especially, say, a very small farmer, be morally superior to such a
man fulfilling a public function, bringing salt to the saltless area rich in timber and vice
versa? Why should this be? And he takes only that profit which is needed to keep his
family, to give sustenance to his family. Why should it be? What I am driving at is this:
one must consider the possibility that Plato makes a conscious concession to the
gentleman’s taste. I don’t believe it would suffice here, but it is possible that it is part of
the story. You know that we have seen such other concessions on former occasions. You
remember, in the case of certain kinds of homicide, where concession was made to the
feeling of the demand of revenge? That could be.
Student: I would suggest that the virtuous man should not become a retail trader for the
same reason that he should not become a slave. Both the slave function and the retail
function are necessary functions of the society, public functions, but they are unworthy.
LS: Yes, but that is a question of a certain . . . But from the highest point of view that
would be a concession, because that is a very external consideration.
Student: What would be a concession?
LS: A concession on the part of Plato to the general social opinion. After all, we mustn’t
fool ourselves. That a man may have the most unpleasant and unsavory profession—I
mean “savory” here from the point of view of our noses—and can be a man of the
greatest inner dignity—I hope you have no doubt about that—whereas someone having a
position of the highest social dignity can be a man without any inner worth. That is
trivial. And Plato knew that, of course. So from the highest point of view, these merely
social and external graces are not decisive. And that, from the highest point of view,

374
would be a concession. Take, for example, this concession which plays a very great role
and to which Aristotle alludes. In a way, the most degrading occupations in the older
view are those where a personal service of the body to someone else is involved, say,
barbering. A blacksmith is a different story; he doesn’t serve you but serves your horse,
whereas [being] a barber was regarded as degrading and other things of this kind. But
why should this really be a point of view valid for a truly superior man? After all, in a
deeper sense it doesn’t degrade a man to shave another man.
Student: Isn’t it possible that this can also discourage the maintenance of the virtue of
the men who went into that in the first place?
LS: That is exactly the point he makes. He admits that it is a particularly dangerous job,
morally. Therefore, let us ask the most morally protected men, the most virtuous men, to
go into that.
Student: But doesn’t he have a rule in one of the earlier books that citizens were to keep
away from this entirely, and the alternative was to have people who were not so
important to the state . . .
LS: All right, but we ascend a bit in the argument. We took something for granted in the
earlier argument. Taking the situation as it is now, where the lovers of gain turn into
that,2 then of course it becomes degrading. But we can question that, assuming a very
great power of the legislator—and Plato assumes that all the time, especially in the
Republic and to some extent even here, and he makes explicitly this proposal: how
wonderful these services of trade are would become visible if the most virtuous men in
the community were delegated to perform these functions.
Student: But virtuous men are needed to perform other functions.
LS: That is an important consideration. And also another important consideration, which
played a very great role in ancient times and even up to the First World War, if I am not
mistaken, at least in some countries, was the relation of the profession to military service.
For example, Xenophon’s argument in favor of agriculture, farming, as the gentleman’s
profession was that the farming activity is most conducive to becoming good soldiers, a
view which prevailed until the First World War, and the latter part where the
technological character of war came to the fore. And then the industrial workers proved
to be superior (at least they found this to be true in Germany) to the farmers. Up to a
certain point, it was simply so that generally speaking the farmers were the best material
for military service because of that life in the open air and exposure to all the toughness
of the life, as compared with that of the artisan or the trader in the city.
Student: But to pursue the point even further: Is it valid to say that somehow the farming
activity is a better and nobler activity than the retail trading activity, even granting that it
was honest?

375
LS: The reasoning which Aristotle indicates in the first book of the Politics is this: that
the farmer earns his livelihood entirely from nature, and everyone who lives on other
human beings is always confronted with the possibility of cheating. You cannot cheat the
earth, the soil, but you can cheat human beings. That was surely one point of view. But
one has to go into that, and especially one must be grateful to come across such a passage
in Plato where one sees a man trying to go beyond the merely accepted opinion to see
whether that is really necessarily so. It is a remarkable passage.
Student: I was thinking, in connection with the remark about cheating, that perhaps part
of it is due to the fact that there is no manifest or clear natural standard to indicate what
the right exchange would be. I was thinking of the passage in Aristotle where he sort of
makes it clear that these things are not in themselves commensurable, which are traded.
LS: Yes, but they are made commensurable by money. And Aristotle gives the formula
for the fair price: time, and then the value of the material.
Student: But it is also the effort and the pain undergone in the production. And there is
also the element of need.
LS: But still, that did not prevent people for a very long time, up to Archbishop Laud in
Englandiv inclusively, and in some countries in even more recent times, to establish
maximal prices, minimal prices, this kind of thing. That someone really exploits a
scarcity situation, that is a defensible proposition. You can’t expect a great exactness to
the penny in these matters.
Student: Wasn’t he unjust to make money on a monopoly of the wine presses?v
LS: Yes, but he did it only in order to teach a more fundamental lesson: that a
philosopher could do that if he wanted.
Student: Make money or be unjust?
LS: Yes, but perhaps this one injustice, if it was an injustice, was redeemed by the very
great lesson it conveyed.
Student: But isn’t the very fact that retail trade has always more or less lent itself to
encouraging something like cheating, and that the goods themselves are not by nature
commensurable?
LS: But I think we must admire, nevertheless, Plato’s attempt to transcend the common
views in order then to discover, perhaps, valid reasons. But let us continue, because I
think the example he gives is very helpful to understanding it.
iv

William Laud (b. 1573), Archbishop of Canterbury from 1633 to 1645.
In Politics 1259a Aristotle tells of Thales, who responded to taunts concerning the uselessness
of philosophy by using his knowledge of atronomy to predict crop yields and thereby to establish
a monopoly on the oil and wine presses.
v

376

Reader:
[Ath.:] But as things are now, whenever a man has planted his house, with a view to retail
trade, in a desert place and with all the roads from it lengthy, if in this welcome lodging
he receives travellers in distress, providing tranquillity and calm to those buffeted by
fierce storms or restful coolness after torrid heat,—the next thing is that, instead of
treating them as comrades and providing friendly gifts as well as entertainment, he holds
them to ransom, as if they were captive foemen in his hands, demanding very high sums
of unjust and unclean ransom-money; it is criminal practices such as this, in the case of
all these trades, that afford grounds of complaint against this way of succoring distress.
(919a-b)
LS: Is this not a beautiful description of the situation, to compare this benefactor of
mankind who established an inn to help tired travelers, you know? And then you find out
it has nothing whatever to do with such motivations but only with the exploiting of the
necessities of fellow humans.
Student: I just wonder if Plato’s point is really not a rather simple one, whether we have
not really gone a little beyond him when we start talking about the concession he might
have made to the gentlemanly occupation. The point seems to be simply that the retail
trade, or any other sort of commerce, is morally neutral in itself, and it depends upon the
people filling these roles whether or not it becomes . . .
LS: Yes, but would this not apply to every other occupation as well?
Student: The fact is that people attribute to this trade something which is morally bad in
itself. Plato is, I think, trying to say this is not the case. It depends upon the fact that the
mass of humanity have desires and they have found this is a good way to vent these
desires and get gains for themselves. That the desert motel, or whatever it is here, has
high prices is probably a good example of this. It could just as easily by the other way, as
you said.
LS: But on the other hand, of course one could say that he charges somewhat higher
prices is defensible because of the difficulty of transport and all this kind of thing. That
they go beyond that is probably true in all cases. But there is a disagreement?
Student: I was thinking of some intrinsic difference between trade and farming. For the
farmer addition[al] exertion means only that he can grow additional things. And if he had
certain basic desires and wanted to become more comfortable, he could only try to
increase the yield on his ground. While the trader has always the possibility of gypping
someone else and achieving the same benefit the farmer achieves if he increases his yield
and thus benefits the community by additional production.
LS: And also the inflicting of injustice, which is of course possible on a farm too. But
there is a great mitigation because at least the free members of that household are his kin,
and therefore a mitigating element enters, whereas the retail trader is of course let loose

377
on people who are not his kin. Sure. But it is very good to give these things some
thought. Let us finish this passage where we left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] For these evils, then, the lawgiver must in each case provide a medicine. It is an
old and true saying that it is hard to fight against the attack of two foes from opposite
quarters, as in the case of diseases and many other things; and indeed our present fight in
this matter is against two foes, poverty and plenty, of which the one corrupts the soul of
men with luxury, while the other by means of pain plunges it into shamelessness. What
remedy, then, is to be found for this disease in a State gifted with understanding? The
first is to employ the trading class as little as possible; the second, to assign to that class
those men whose corruption would prove no great loss to the State; the third, to find a
means whereby the dispositions of those engaged in these callings may not quite so easily
become infected by shamelessness and meanness of soul. (919b-c)
LS: We don’t need the rest. This is the argument which leads up to the law which
excludes citizens from any participation in retail trading.
Now the next point to which I would like to draw your attention is in 920d7, page 413, at
the bottom of the page.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Sacred to Hephaestus and Athena is the class of craftsmen who have furnished our
life with the arts, and to Ares and Athena belong those who safeguard the products of
these craftsmen by other defensive arts; rightly is this class also sacred to these deities.
These all continually serve both the country and the people: the one class are leaders in
the contests of war, the others produce for pay instruments and works; and it would be
unseemly for these men to lie concerning their crafts, because of their reverence for their
divine ancestors. (920d-e)
LS: You see, this sentence with which we began is probably translated correctly, but the
“who” of the relative clause could also refer to the two gods, Hephaestus and Athena,
“who have our life supplied with the arts.” Now the interesting thing, I think, is the
ambiguity. Who supplied our lives with the arts, the human artificer or these two gods?
This is a great question going through the Platonic dialogues; we find many traces of it.
In the myth of the Protagoras as well as the myth of the Statesman reference is made to
the divine origin of the arts. Here this statement is, to say the least, ambiguous, and even
more likely to be understood the way it is understood by the translator. The whole
question of the origin of mankind is involved here, you know: a perfect beginning with
gods at the beginning supplying man with the arts, or an imperfect beginning where man
gradually and slowly developed the arts. That is what is involved. Now if we read the
immediate sequel we see that the ascription to the gods of the arts is a problem on the
practical level.
Reader:

378
[Ath.:] If any craftsman fail to execute his work within the time named, owing to
basesness—he not revering the god who gives him his livelihood, but deeming him (in
his blindness of mind) to be merciful because of his kinship— (921a)
LS: You see, in other words, that can be turned around. If we understand the gods
properly, we will revere the gods, be ashamed before them, and then act virtuously. But
on the other hand, we can also emphasize the family relation as it were and say: Very
well, the gods fight with us artisans anyway; they are our kin—and then take them as
protectors of3 [our] own iniquities. In the immediate sequel or a bit further on there is a
remarkable praise of art [as] an open, sincere and truthful thing by nature—art as
distinguished from trade.
Student: . . . would this be an argument against the position that Plato held a personal
god, at least in the Christian sense?
LS: No, what he has in mind here is only this. The divine origin of the arts can be
interpreted in two opposite ways: in a moral and in an immoral way. The moral way, the
obligation to the gods; and the immoral way, the gods are on your side: you are the friend
of the gods, as it were, and they will stick to you regardless of what you do. That is the
point. So the mere belief in the divine origin is of no use. The crucial point is the morality
of the believer4 and not the belief itself. That I think is implied. And that is of course also
relevant on the basis of the biblical tradition. This misuse of religion is always possible.
Now this praise of art is, I think, quite important and a theme of all Platonic dialogues,
we can say.
Then somewhat later (921e6, or at the end of 921, as a matter of fact) he translates “a law
which counsels rather than compels.” This distinction is made also elsewhere in this book
and is a fundamental distinction. A counseling law and a compelling law. What we
understand today is of course only a compelling law, a law with sanctions by punishment.
But in the Platonic view, and that is not merely the Platonic view, there are also laws
where no compulsion is involved, only praise and blame of the legislature, but they are
also laws. For example, if something is declared to be undignified, that is not a law in the
modern sense but from Plato’s point of view it is a law. Here what I want to emphasize is
only the explicit terminological distinction between a counseling law and a compulsory
law.
Student: Don’t we have something of that left in Senate [and] House Resolutions and
some laws which are passed with remarkable little penalty, say, the latest civil rights
law?vi It has little compelling worth, but as counsel . . .
LS: To what extent is what you say correct? There are some people here who have taken
courses in constitutional law. What do they say about that subject?
Student: Well, you might say it is aimed at compelling and simply a defective measure
to compel, because of certain circumstances as the result of its creation.
vi

Probably the Civil Rights Act of 1957.

379

LS: I see. In other words, what is vulgarly known as a law without teeth.
Student: This would be one way of looking at it.
LS: But that is a defect, then. I have been told that in the Tsarist code, maybe not under
the last Tsar but earlier, there was a law to the effect that men should not get drunk, and
there were no penalties involved, no sanctions. And that is of course a mere counsel. This
kind of thing is ridiculous from the point of view of modern legislation, but it was not
regarded this way in olden times. Plato in this respect simply voices the earlier view.
When you read the Old Testament laws, for example, there are quite a few cases in which
no sanction is involved, which have a merely hortatory character. And yet they were not
regarded as not fit to be part of a code.
Student: I wonder whether we couldn’t make the distinction in terms that we now make
it, in terms of law which has sanction and custom. A custom is the kind of thing which
counsels you to perform in a certain way in a society, and there is no penalty necessarily
for failure to comply.
LS: No formal penalty, but there is of course also disapproval.
Student: Yes, there may be disapproval.
LS: Yes, sure. One can only say this: in this older notion of laws, the distinction between
custom and law was not so simply and clearly drawn as it is today, and that is a long story
which leads to very interesting problems of jurisprudence. Why? You have to raise the
question of principle. Where is the line to be drawn? I mean not only in this or that case
but as a matter of principle. And this eventually found its philosophic expression in the
distinction between law and morality as a distinction. The beginning of this was made in
the Enlightenment, and in German classical philosophy very much is made of that. Then
in the nineteenth century it became [a] common[place] throughout the western world that
law has in itself nothing to do with morality. This leads to other grave difficulties,
because there are always limit cases where morality enters the law, for example, the
famous example of contracts—contracts against good custom—where morality and
custom somehow come in in the course of judgment by the judges. It is no longer a
simply legal concept. And other things of the same kind. We have now reached the end of
the first section, and we begin now with the section on orphans, and I think we should
also read that (page 419).
Reader:
[Ath.:] We have now made regulations for most of the more important business dealings
between man and man, excepting those regarding orphans and the care of orphans by
their guardians; so, after those now dealt with, these matters must necessarily receive
some kind of regulation. All these have their starting-points either in the desire of those at
the point of death to devise their property, or in the accidental cases of those who die
without making a testament; and it was in view of the complex and difficult nature of

380
these cases, Clinias, that I made use of the word “necessarily.” And it is, indeed,
impossible to leave them without regulation; for individuals might set down many wishes
both at variance with one another and contrary to the laws as well as to the dispositions of
the living, and also to their own former dispositions in the days before they proposed
making a will, if any will that a man makes were to be granted absolute and
unconditional validity, no matter what his state of mind at the end of his life. For most of
us are more or less in a dull and enfeebled state of mind, when we imagine that we are
near the point of death.vii (922a)
LS: Now, this is very interesting. Probably we would have no difficulty in understanding
that, but Clinias has a difficulty here, as we see from the sequel. How do you explain it?
Student: Isn’t it unusual that he is addressing himself to Clinias gratuitously?
LS: No, probably he foresaw that, that Clinias is in need of being told that.
Student: Well, why should he foresee it?
LS: Because he is a very intelligent man. This is universally true of all Platonic
dialogues, that the chief speaker, Socrates mostly, but here the Athenian Stranger, cannot
be understood if he is not seen to be by far superior to the other individuals in such a way
that he knows well in advance how the other fellow is going to act. We have seen such
cases, when he says casually in this dialogue, “By some accident we have come to this
point,” when it is clear—viii —see a tall woman in white, and very beautiful, appearing
and telling him that on the third day you will be in (how do they translate it?) the fertile
sphere. That is the verse from the Iliad and addressed by Thetis, I think, to Achilles. Now
Phthia is somehow in the general direction from Athens. As Thessaly, the country to
which Socrates was supposed to go, and then Crito is amazed by this foresight, this
prophetic dream of Socrates—that he had seen in his dream that on the third day from
now he will be . . .
Student: Perhaps it comes from Achilles, I believe, saying that if I run away . . .
LS: Then Socrates improved it in a way that his mother told, I guess. You see here that is
of course an ironization of Socrates’s foresight, an exaggeration of it. But that is the
notion which Plato had of Socrates and also of the Athenian Stranger: that he sees
through the people to whom he talks. It could be, although I would have to study that
much more carefully in order to decide that, that this “Oh Clinias” [relates to] this
limitation on making wills or testaments. And then it proved to be correct by the reaction.
Student: Couldn’t you say that insofar as this is contrary to accepted practice and Clinias
seems to be so concerned with accepted practice, that you anticipate this even before he
begins?
vii
viii

In the Loeb: “we are nearly at the point of death.”
There was a break in the tape at this point.

381
LS: Yes. You see, you have to consider two things, surely. Incidentally, in this first
question, where he says, “How do you mean this, Stranger?”—now in my experience the
Athenian Stranger is called Stranger in all cases where he appears strange to them, to
Clinias or to Megillus. That is true. One thing is that the Athenian makes outlandish
proposals, proposals with which they are not accustomed. But the other things which you
must also not forget is that these are old men; therefore, they are not simply Cretans or
Spartans, but old Cretans and old Spartans. Sometimes these are not the qualities of
Cretans or Spartans but the qualities of old men which induce them to react in the way
that they react. And it is perfectly possible that the question of the last hold on power an
old man has to punish the disobedient children—how does Locke put it?
Student: He has no small call upon the child’s affections.ix
LS: Yes. If he can give you more or less. And to be deprived of that is very much
disliked. Now let us go on.
Reader:
[Clin.]: How do you mean that, Stranger?x
[Ath.]: A man at the point of death, Clinias—
LS: You see, he says again “Clinias.” He emphasizes that. And that is also another point:
Don’t forget your mortality. A broader point: that is a danger in which we all are. And the
Athenian Stranger never forgets that for a moment. That is the difference. Never!
Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Clinias, is a difficult subject, and overflowing with speech that is most alarming
and vexatious to a lawgiver.
[Clin.]: How so?
[Ath.]: Since he claims to be lord of all he has, he is wont to speak angrily.
[Clin.]: What will he say?
[Ath.]: “Good heavens!” he cries, “what a monstrous shame it is, if I am now allowed at
all to give, or not give, my own things to whomsoever I will—and more to one, less to
another, according as they have proved themselves good to me or bad, when fully tested
in times of sickness, or else in old age and in other happenings of every kind.”
[Clin.]: And do you not think, Stranger, that what they say is right?
[Ath.]: What I think, Clinias, is this—that the old lawgivers were cowardly, and gave
laws with a short view and a slight consideration of human affairs.
LS: You see, again he addresses him personally by using his name. Continue.
Reader:
[Ath.:] It was through fear, my dear sir, of that angry speech that they made the law
allowing a man unconditionally to dispose by will of his goods exactly how he pleases.
ix
x

John Locke, Second Treatise of Government, sections 72-73.
In the Loeb: “What do you mean by this, Stranger?”

382
But you and I will make a more suitable answer to those in your State who are at the
point of death. (922c-923a)
LS: And so on. And then he tries to show the necessity of putting some limitation on the
freedom of testation. But there is another point which is important to consider. What is
the state of mind of the dying man, the dying father of a family he has described here?
Student: Revenge on his descendants.
LS: Anger. Let us not forget the Platonic tripartition of the soul. Well, reason, that is a
class by itself, but what are the other two?
Student: Spirit and desire.
LS: And what does anger belong to? Spirit. Surely not desire; it is too late for that. But
that is an important point. Since this problem of spiritedness is terribly important, every
little remark which Plato makes must be considered. In other words, here we learn this
simple thing: that when it is much too late to desire, men are still5 [able] to be angry and
still to be spirited.
Student: Couldn’t they also be full of love for their kinfolk?
LS: That could be. If they are of the proper temperament, they might be.
Student: It is interesting that we also have the case where people leave all their money to
cats and dogs, and I guess this would be a love for the animal in opposition to the people
who may have mistreated them.
LS: That is what some people say, that this extreme love for animals is usually the
counterpart of a deficient love for humans. But there are other points.
Student: Since anger is directed towards suppression of desire, another’s or one’s own,
one could say that when desire is at its minimum then the spiritedness or anger could
reach its fulfillment. It might give a certain connection between asceticism and severe
morality.
LS: I would not want to draw any further conclusion, but I think this simple remark is not
unimportant, and how this remark would fit into other remarks about the same subject in
this very book is an interesting question. I did not say entirely without reason that there is
an explicit reference to comedy and an explicit reference to rhetoric but no explicit
reference to tragedy, and I just wonder whether these things in a deeper stratum do not fit.
Student: Since we are flying around here . . .
LS: We do nothing more than that.

383
Student: The reason why he is angry, you might say, is because he is not angry in
general, but rather he is angry at the fact that here he is with his last chance to be and do,
and this bum on the outside is trying to cheat him.
LS: That would also be the answer to Mr. ____, I take it. If you take such a simple man,
he has really nothing to look forward to. The only way in which he can show his power is
by denying it.
Student: Or granting it; that is, granting or denying it in the fashion he chooses. This is
the last chance he has to be—
LS: I just wonder. Is not the connection this: death, the end, no hope for further desires,
the fearful character of death. Man opposes himself to the thought of dying. What
remains there except to turn this aversion, if he doesn’t want to take death lying down, to
vent it in revengeful action? Something of this kind. But that needs of course a much
closer analysis.
Student: Is this also a reflection on the laws of the dead and not only of the dying,
because there seems to be some disparagement of the old lawgivers?
LS: Yes, in the same connection.
Student: That somehow the . . . wisdom should take care of the living.
LS: Now let me see. Surely one has to consider that there must be a linkup of some kind.
That seems to be a characteristic of all ancient legislators, that they have been too kind,
too indulgent to dying old men. That is true. That is an important point, it must be kept in
mind. How this all must be linked up eventually is completely hazy, and one must wait
patiently until such time as one gets the link. But you must not forget that according to a
very respectable doctrine developed beautifully by Fustel de Coulanges in the Ancient
City,xi the origin of Greek religion is really ancestor worship. Now that means the dying
or the dead, the ancestors, grandparents and so on, must be appeased by the living. They
have been deprived of the good things available to the living, and yet they have a very
great power over the living. This is very clearly developed by Coulanges at the beginning
of his book. Now here you have these people, you know, where thymos, anger, of some
sort is the primary appeaser. I mean, they can become also the loving protectors, but they
have to become appeased to become that.
Student: What I had in mind was a very difficult passage in Farabi’s commentary, where
he says that the faith or support of the living for the law is the highest virtue, and . . . the
living against the dead.

xi

Numa Denis Fustel de Coulanges, The Ancient City: A Study on the Religion, Laws, and
Institutions of Greece and Rome (1873).

384
LS: We get some more passages about the subject a bit later. We can’t take care of that
now. Let us see first in 925d5, page 431, top.
Reader:
[Ath.]: Now we must not fail to notice how burdensome such a law may prove, in that
sometimes it harshly orders the next of kin to the deceased to marry his kinswoman, and
that it appears to overlook the thousands of impediments which in human life prevent
men from being willing to obey such orders and cause them to prefer any other
alternative, however painful, in cases where either of the parties ordered to marry is
suffering from diseases or defects of mind or body.
LS: In other words, the situation is this: the estate must be kept together. And then there
is a very repulsive heiress there, but someone is defined by law to marry her, you know,
and he might very well prefer to be a beggar in a foreign country than to be the husband
of this creature. Sure. Now what does Plato in his wisdom say to these difficult
questions?
Reader:
[Ath.:] Some might suppose that the lawgiver is paying no heed to these considerations,
but they would be wrong. On behalf, therefore, of the lawgiver as well as of him to whom
the law applies let a kind of general prelude be uttered, requesting those to whom the
order is given to pardon the lawgiver because it is impossible for him, in his care for the
public interests, to control also the private misfortunes which befall individuals, and
requesting pardon also for the subjects of the law, inasmuch as they are naturally unable
at times to carry out ordinances of the lawgiver laid down by him in ignorance.
[Clin.:] As regards this, Stranger, what would be the most rational course of action to
adopt?
[Ath.:] It is necessary, Clinias, that for laws of this kind, and those whom they affect,
arbitrators should be chosen.
[Clin.:] How do you mean?
[Ath.:] It might happen that a nephew, who has a rich father, would be loth to take to wife
his uncle’s daughter, giving himself airs and being minded to make a grander match. Or
again, when what the lawgiver enjoins would be a fearful calamity, a man might be
compelled to disobey the law—for instance, when the law would force him to enter into
an alliance with madness or some other dire affliction of body or soul, such as makes life
intolerable to the person so obliged.xii (925d-926b)
LS: That is a remarkably clear statement about the essential defects of laws, and the
solution is that living arbiters who know the situation must then prevent hardships: the
principle of equity. Now let us see a bit later (926e9, page 435).
Reader:
[Ath.:] In the first place, to act in the room of their begetters, as parents of no inferior
kind, we must legally appoint the Law-wardens; and we charge three of these, year by
year, to care for the orphans as their own, having already given both to these men and to
xii

In the Loeb: “the person so allied.”

385
the guardians a suitable prelude of directions concerning the nurture of orphans.
Opportune, indeed, as I think, was the account we previously gave of how the souls of the
dead have a certain power of caring for human affairs after death. The tales which contain
this doctrine are true, though long; and while it is right to believe the other traditions
about such matters, which are so numerous and exceeding old, we must also believe those
who lay it down by law that these are facts, unless it is plain that they are utter fools. So if
this is—
LS: May I mention the fact that nowhere does the word mythos, myth, occur here in the
original. Continue.
Reader:
So if this is really the state of the case, the guardians shall fear, first, the gods above who
pay regard to the solitude of orphans; and secondly, the souls of the dead, whose natural
instinct it is to care especially for their own offspring, and to be kindly disposed to those
who respect them and hostile to those who disrespect them; and, thirdly, they shall fear
the souls of the living who are old and who are held in most high esteem; since where the
State flourishes under good laws, their children’s children revere the aged with affection
and live in happiness. These old people are keen of eye and keen of ear to mark such
matters, and while they are gracious towards those who deal justly therein, they are very
wroth with those who despitefully entreat orphans and waifs, regarding these as a trust
most solemn and sacred. To all these authorities the guardian and official—if he has a
spark of sense—must pay attention; he must show as much care regarding the nurture and
training of the orphans as if he were contributing to his own support and that of his own
children, and he must do them good in every way to the utmost of his power. He, then,
that obeys the tale prefixed to the law and in no wise misuses the orphan will have no
direct experience of the anger of the lawgiver against such offences—
LS: You see, the anger of the lawgiver, which is mentioned here in another context.
Continue.
Reader:
but the disobedient and he that wrongs any who has lost father or mother shall in every
case pay a penalty double of that due from the man who offends against a child with both
parents living. (926e-927d)
LS: Now why is here this emphatic recourse made to these stories or tales? Why is it
needed? What does the lawgiver command, and why is this command in need of such a
reinforcement? That would be the question. What does he command?
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, but what does the lawgiver demand of the guardians or the law wardens, the
people in charge of the orphans?
Student: . . .

386

LS: Like his own children. In the case of his own children there is a natural love. Here
these are not his children, and he should love them as if they were his own children. And
how does this work out? Let us see in the sequel. We don’t have to read everything, so let
us begin with the last word on page 437.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Consequently, in its regulations concerning orphans the law has emphasized this
very point both by admonition and by threat. A threat, moreover, of the following kind
will be extremely opportune— (927e-928a)
LS: And so on. So there is admonition and threat, but the threat is more emphasized here.
He also had spoken of the anger of the legislator. The reason is this. In proportion as the
law makes a demand not in accordance with nature, the compulsory element—either by
human compulsion or the threat by divine powers—is required. There is no need for
threatening the natural parents as to taking care of their children, 6 [except] in perverted
cases. But in this case it is essentially necessary because that natural pity is not so
common or so reliable as the natural love for children.
Student: Is the anger of the lawgiver parallel to that of the dying man, who is also angry
and . . .
LS: Not identical, but there is a kinship between 7 [them]. The lawgiver voices what the
dead parents would say. The dead parents of the orphaned child would make this threat to
everyone [against] hurting their children. But these wills of the dead parents become
effective only through the voice of the legislator. There it is not identical but akin. Of
course his consideration is simply this: that the orphans are as much future citizens as the
non-orphan children, and if they are ruined or deeply hurt in their childhood this is by no
means for the good of the society as a whole. But they are particularly exposed to the
viciousness of other men because they do not have this natural protection afforded by
natural parents.
Student: The anger of the lawgiver is in some sense in relation in that he is more angry
the more unnatural his demand is.
LS: Generally speaking.
Student: I was just wondering, the Athenian Stranger here seems to have an accent on
the necessity of love in the life of a child, a sense of being loved. He exhorts the
guardians to love them as their own children. It seems to be a consideration on the basis
that they need this love to somehow grow up and be good citizens.
LS: Yes, but in an entirely unsentimental way. But otherwise clear.

387
Student: But how does this compare with the Republic, where children are not to have
fathers and mothers? Do the prescriptions in the Republic concerning the rearing of
children somehow go against this?
LS: There is no question. But we have read this in 739, the deviation from the sacred life.
The establishment of private property and of the family is the difference between the
Laws and the Republic. Now as for the Republic, I can only say this. I believe there is
plenty of evidence from the Republic, especially if one reads it thinkingly, to see that
Plato regarded this as utterly impossible, utterly impossible to have this communism. I
explained this more than once, that he did this in order to bring out—
Student: Certainly, but I’m saying that it is not only utterly impossible but also utterly
undesirable.
LS: Sure. Both. For Plato, that is not so greatly different. What is utterly impossible is, as
such, for a reasonable man undesirable.
Student: I mean that even for the philosopher in his divine madness it would be
utterly . . .
LS: Sure, sure, I know that. But there is of course this great problem because this
affection that parents ordinarily have for their children, going together in frequent cases
with great stupidity, can do a lot of harm. But still, in the early years at any rate the
affection is more important, one could say, because not so terribly great an intelligence is
needed, at least according to the old-fashioned view, for treating a baby up to three or
four8 [as] when they are ten or fifteen.
Student: But don’t you think that Plato really considered that the state as conceived in
the Republic is desirable even though it is impossible, and even ultimately desirable?
LS: There is a verse in a modern poem, or drama, called Faust by Goethe, where Faust
says: “Him I love who desires the impossible.” xiii That is absolutely impossible for Plato
or Aristotle, that a sensible man could desire the impossible. That is out of the question.
That is a kind of dream in which you could indulge for some time before you could have
fully realized the impossibility, but when it is impossible give it up and replace it by a
sensible one. As for the Republic, that would lead us much too far. We would have to go
through a chain of reasoning which I could not reproduce in five minutes by which one
could show that is impossible. I ask you only to think of this simple thing. Consider the
argument at the end of the seventh book, where the original condition—if the
philosophers become kings or the kings become philosophers—is radically modified,
namely, not only must the philosophers become kings but they must also expel the whole
citizen body older than ten from the city if the good city is to come. And think just on the
basis of what you know of human nature and human affairs to see whether that is not
tantamount to admitting the impossibility.
xiii

Faust, Part 2, Act 2, l. 7488. (“Den Lieb ich, der unmögliches begehert.”)

388
Student: I admit this is tantamount to admitting . . . but I had always had the impression
that Plato takes this quite seriously, in a way.
LS: In a way, yes, because a theoretical and hypothetical discussion is for a theoretical
man something very serious. By thinking this possibility through, of the communism and
all the arrangements, and by realizing why they are impossible, one understands the polis.
It is an attempt to deny the polis in the guise of an attempt to improve it. It is really a
destruction of the polis. But we cannot summarize the Republic in a few words; that is
impossible.
But to come back to the subject at hand. That is clear that in proportion as the demand is
not supported by nature or [is] even against nature; it requires much sharper punishment,
harsher measures. Let us look at 929a6.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Such cases should be dealt with according to a law such as this:—If any man is
urged by a most unhappy impulse of anger to desire, rightly or wrongly, to expel from his
own kindred one whom he has begotten and reared, he shall not be permitted to do this
informally and immediately, but he shall, first of all, assemble his own kinsfolk as far as
cousins and likewise his son’s kinfolk— (929a-b)
LS: We don’t need these details. Now this is a case of the bad son, the black sheep (I do
not know how this is translated in the English translation) in Deuteronomy.xiv What is this
son? A drinker, a spendthrift; in other words, a bad boy. And that is a very remarkable
passage in the Old Testament. Father and mother bring him before the elders and finally
he will be stoned. That is the case which is under discussion here. But also the
characteristic mood in the parents, passion in the parents, especially in the father, is
thymos, spiritedness and anger. And then also a bit later, 929c5 to 6, where this point is
just sketched in. On page 443, what he puts in brackets in the middle of the page.
Reader:
[Ath.:] no law shall prevent him from doing so, (for the characters of the young naturally
undergo many changes during their life )— (929c)
LS: In other words, this boy is not necessarily lost if he is such an undesirable fellow at
nineteen or twenty. Therefore, the possibility of adoption of this son by another father, by
another old citizen in the community, is left open.
Student: Isn’t he also tactfully trying to arrange that it might be the father’s fault that the
son is being exiled?
LS: Therefore the provision that the father cannot unilaterally do it, or the parents, but
that it has to be checked by the community as a whole, and in the first place by the whole
family, by the large family, and then by the community.
xiv

Deuteronomy 21:18-21, on the treatment of the “stubborn and rebellious son.”

389
Now there is a very beautiful passage later on in 930 (towards the end) till 932
(beginning), but that is too long to read, about the aged parents and grandparents. That is
a very impressive passage. They are the true statutes of the gods in the house on whom
the well-being depends. Again the case of helpless people who need special protection by
divine sanction.
This discussion of family relations comes to an end in 932d, and then he suddenly turns
to the subject of witchcraft. The connection I believe is this. We have here been
concerned with religious emotions and with religious institutions, and the grossest case of
misuse of such notions comes then first. There are only two more passages which I think
we should read. One is at the end of 933, and it concerns the doctrine of punishment
again, which is here stated in a simple and quasi-final form. That is on page 457.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In all cases where one man causes damage to another by acts of robbery or
violence, if the damage be great, he shall pay a large sum as compensation to the
damaged party, and a small sum if the damage be small; and as a general rule, every man
shall in every case pay a sum equal to the damage done, until the loss is made good; and,
in addition to this, every man shall pay the penalty which is attached to his crime by way
of corrective. The penalty shall be lighter in the case of one who has done wrong by
another’s folly—the wrongdoer being over-persuaded because of his youth or for some
such reason; and it shall be heavier when the man has done wrong owing to his own folly,
because of his incontinence in respect of pleasures and pains and the overpowering
influence of craven fears or of incurable desires, envies and rages. And he shall pay the
penalty, not because of the wrongdoing,—for what is done can never be undone,—but in
order that for the future both he himself and those who behold his punishment may either
utterly loathe his sin or at least renounce to a great extent such lamentable conduct.
(933e-934b)
LS: Now that is a very simplified version of the Platonic doctrine of punishment, and at
this point it is of course very commonsensical. But also it does not make clear the
fundamental problem. There is one more passage in the next paragraph which we should
read. That is concerned again with the problem of thymos, spiritedness or anger, however
you want to translate it.
Reader:
[Ath.:] If any be a madman, he shall not appear openly in the city; the relatives of such
persons shall keep them indoors, employing whatever means they know of, or else they
shall pay a penalty; a person belonging to the highest property-class— (934c-d)
LS: That we can omit. Begin later in the paragraph.
Reader:

390
There are many and various forms of madness: in the cases now mentioned it is caused
by disease, but cases also occur where it is due to the natural growth and fostering of his
evil temperxv—
LS: What he translated “evil temper” is in Greek thymos, the spiritedness. By virtue of
the evil nature of the spiritedness. Continue.
Reader:
by which men in the course of a trifling quarrel abuse one another slanderously with loud
cries—a thing which is unseemly and totally out of place in a well-regulated State.
Concerning abuse there shall be this one law to cover all cases:—No one shall abuse
anyone. If one is disputing with another in argument, he shall either speak or listen, and
he shall wholly refrain from abusing either the disputant or the bystanders. For from
those light things, words, there spring in deed things most heavy to bear, even hatreds and
feuds, when men begin cursing one another and foully abusing one another in the manner
of fish-wives; and the man who utters such words is gratifying a thing most ungracious
and sating his passion with foul foods, and by thus brutalizing afresh that part of his soul
which once was humanized by education, he makes a wild beast of himself through his
rancorous life, and wins only gall for gratitude from his passion. (934d-935a)
LS: Let us stop here. Now that is a remarkable passage. Here thymos is called pragma
acharistona: an ungraceful thing, a thing lacking grace. And if you think of the
importance attached to it in the Republic and the high praise bestowed upon it, that is
quite remarkable. Well, I remind you of the simple point. In the Republic you have a
tripartition of the soul: reason, then spiritedness, and then desire. And contrary to simple
everyday experiences, spiritedness as such is assigned a higher status than the desires.
This does not really make sense if you think, for example, that someone has a desire, a
low, base desire for something forbidden, mean, but if he does not get it and gets angry
about it, that is in no way nobler of course than the desire. It might even be baser. So
there is a great difficulty here as to why such a high status is given to spiritedness. Now
the word for desire, in Greek epithymia, designates a variety of phenomena of which the
most interesting, from Plato’s point of view at any rate, is eros. Now we see in the
Republic that eros is treated very badly. For example, when the tyrant is described, a man
who is injustice incarnate, he is also presented as eros incarnate. The exaggerated praise
of spiritedness is accompanied by a demotion of eros. That is one of the greatest
difficulties, and characteristic at any rate of the Republic.
Now here this remark about thymos is very important. Thymos is described as something
remote from the graces. It cannot be appeased. It is uncontrollably savage. On the other
hand, there is a connection between eros and the graces. That this bad side of thymos, of
spiritedness, is so explicitly stated in the Laws is connected, I think, with the relaxation of
the extreme demands made in the Republic. That has something to do with the subject we
touched upon before. In proportion as one makes demands on man not in agreement with
man’s nature, harshness and therefore also spiritedness, anger, are required. In proportion
as these demands are made more in agreement with human nature as they are made in the
xv

In the Loeb: “an evil temper”

391
Laws, the need for this thymos or this spiritedness, decreases and therefore its true nature
can be brought out more clearly. That I believe is the connection.
Student: Could it be partly the fact that Plato had grown old? The spiritedness, the highheartedness may have characterized his younger days, but in the crabbed period of old
age . . .
LS: But the trouble is this. While one doesn’t know very much about it but takes the
present-day accepted hypotheses as fact, Plato wrote the Republic and the Banquet in his
middle age. Now the Republic is the praise of spiritedness and the demotion of eros, and
the Banquet is the praise of eros, so there is no basis for that. In addition, I would say
this. That Plato wrote this when he was older, this we know certainly because Aristotle
said the Laws were written after the Republic. And there are even some traditions which
say Plato wrote this in his last years, and surely Plato too was an old man the same as he
was a young man. But before we are able to judge how age affected Plato and to what
extent this is noticeable, one would have to understand him much better than we do. I
give you a simple illustration of that. The subject matter of the Laws requires from
Plato’s point of view a dialogue between old men: this is explicitly stated at the
beginning, where he states that we now have an absence of young men, and this was
required. Even if Plato had the thought of the Laws thirty or forty years earlier, in his
opinion it would require old men—just as Aristotle says in the Ethics, that is not so
greatly different [in its claim] that this ethical subject cannot properly be discussed by
young men who lack the experience which comes with the years. You can enlarge that
and can say that older men—who are not senile, of course—are the best men to speak
about these matters with competence. Now if this is so, Plato could have imitated the
mannerisms of the old, [being] the great poet that he was, even when he was young.
Secondly, Plato might have had this notion very early in his life: If I live long enough, I
am going to write a book on laws as a kind of practical supplement to the Republic, but
with that I wait until I am old because it will then be easier for me to write, to speak like
an old man. And then, what would seem to be a mere imposition of nature on Plato, old
age, was in a way free choice. One cannot tell; it is absolutely impossible, I think. I think
in the case of all great writers, the attempt to give a psychological explanation breaks
down.
Student: Is this really a psychological explanation?
LS: That is a psychological explanation.
Student: He may have been deliberately stressing the wrong side of spiritedness because
he was after all addressing himself to two old men.
LS: That is not a bad point. In this form I would consider it. Can you state it more clearly
for those who have not seen that point? Let me give you a simpler and broader argument.
The men here are a Cretan and a Spartan. Now in the Republic Crete and Sparta are
presented as timocracies, the second-best regime. And in the Republic that is coordinated
with an order of the soul. The best regime, aristocracy, predominance of reason; the

392
second best, timocracy, predominance of spiritedness; then the third, fourth and fifth,
preponderance of desire in various forms: preponderance of necessary desire, oligarchy;
preponderance of unnecessary desire, democracy; of unnatural desire, tyranny. So that is
very good. In other words, [he fights spiritedness here] for the same reason he has to fight
courage so strongly in the first book, since courage and spiritedness go together; [this is]
the polemic here. That is a good point, surely. And that is then wholly independent of any
attempt to psychoanalyze Plato, which I am sure you didn’t intend. Such a thing is
blasphemy, of course. Worse than blasphemy.
I can only say that as far as I have come in understanding Plato, I think this question of
the status, of the relation of spiritedness and eros, leads very deep into the thought of
Plato. One could perhaps say the problematic relation of these two things in man is the
Platonic formula for the human problem. Now is there any other point?
Student: You mentioned that people who are mad would be kept in houses, and this
raises a general problem for me. He hasn’t yet, even though he is talking to the Spartan,
brought up the problem of the exposure of children and the extermination of undesirables.
LS: I think that was discussed, the exposure of the children. It is in an earlier book,
although I couldn’t say where. Where does he speak of this? I believe it is in the fifth
book.
Student: I don’t think he says anything about the exposure of children there.
LS: What about the sixth book?
Student: There is a possibility that it could come up in the fifth book. They are talking
about the overproduction of children.
LS: I think in the sixth book, because when he speaks of the beginnings of human life I
think there is a reference to that. But I may make a mistake regarding that. But for my
own private use I would use this inference a fortiori: if even Aristotle allows the
exposure of children, and Aristotle is generally speaking much more civilized in these
matters, then Plato in his radicalism would surely not simply forbid it. At least [he would]
discuss it, perhaps decide against it on practical grounds, e.g., misuse and so on, but have
no objection to it in principle.
Student: I was wondering with the mad people that instead of locking them up that they
might simply be eliminated.
LS: That is a good question, but you must not forget that madness was not regarded as a
simple disease. It had also a certain halo of [a] divine thing, being possessed by
something, and not necessarily by evil demons. The notion played a great role. I quoted
this remark from the Banquet, that madness has been the cause of the greatest blessings. I
mean, Plato understands it differently, but speaking here from a legal and very
commonsensical point of view, he surely made quite a few concessions to accepted

393
notions. That we have seen going through the book, e.g., the adoption of slavery, certain
penal provisions (I have forgotten now which they were), certain kinds of involuntary
homicide were obviously a concession. For example, why should the forgiveness of the
dying father to the son who in a rage killed him be so decisive for the legislator? After
all, if this grave action of attacking one’s father is to be discouraged so ruthlessly as the
whole situation demands, why should a particular meekness or mildness of a given father
have any say in the matter? Or take another case, the right of asylum. This is another
example, wholly irrational from a rational point of view, and still some concessions are
made to that. This goes through the whole book. This is not a many-headedness on the
part of Plato; he does these things with his eyes open. And the formula which indicates
the principle of these concessions or compromises is this: that nous (intelligence) is and is
not identical with nomos (the law). And to the extent to which it is not, that is shown by
these concessions. And that it is is shown also by quite a few attempts to transcend the
accepted. And the clearest cases of this transcendence occur at the beginning and at the
end: at the beginning, the wine-drinking, which is initially overstated as drunkenness but
later on as a very mild thing; and then at the end, the twelfth book, we get this nocturnal
council as a most important institution, which also transcends the political setup as such.
1

Deleted “which.”
Deleted “and.”
3
Deleted “his.”
4
Deleted “the morality of the believer.”
5
Deleted “capable.”
6
Deleted “excepting.”
7
Deleted “that.”
8
Deleted “than.”
2

394
Session 15: March 5, 1959
Leo Strauss: [In progress] —[I would not say that] your paper was excellent because it
suffered from certain defects which I shall mention, but I would say definitely that it was
unusually interesting. i You made quite a few excellent observations, and if I may try to
express the impression which I got, you looked to me like a man who goes deep into the
sea, a diver looking for things, but water came into your eyes somehow and you didn’t
see certain very obvious things. But you did bring up some jewels, especially what you
said about the very ingenious idea you had, the connection between the end of the Laws
and the end of the Republic, especially this story of Er and the three fates. That is a very
sound and interesting observation.
There are certain points on which I believe you are wrong, e.g., what you said about the
general and the physician. Without looking up the passage now I would suggest that you
have probably been misled by the translation. That can happen. And there were some
other things which I will take up. Also what you said about the funerals—you remember,
the funerals were so important right at the beginning [as] the example of what the
legislator should do in book 5. And at the end it comes up again: the last topic of the
legislation proper, and there the problem of life after death is of course present. But on
the other hand, I believe to say the Athenian Stranger is a tyrant, a man who is devoid of
any capacity to force, doesn’t seem to be warranted to me unless you enlarge the meaning
of the word “tyrant” in such a way that [it applies to] a man who rules over men not on
the basis of law but on the basis of physical, i.e., natural, superiority—as he rules over
Clinias, for example. Then it might be defensible, but it would need a long argument
before it could be accepted.
Now you started from the question, which is very good and very necessary: Who is
ruling? But then you also made some remarks, one remark I remember, which shocks
common sense and therefore is not acceptable as it stands. For example, if you take the
judges, or maybe in the case of arbitration, the arbitrators, and the people abide by the
arbitration, then the arbitrators rule in this case. If the verdict of the judge is accepted, the
judge rules.
Student: It has to be carried out; someone has to execute it.
LS: Yes, sure, but that is simple.
Student: But there seems to be a difficulty in the passage there.
LS: I didn’t notice it.
Student: . . .
i

Strauss comments on a student’s paper, read at the beginning of the session. The reading was not
recorded.

395
LS: Let us see. The judge gives the verdict, say, capital punishment, to take the most
simple case. And then some people are commanded to execute that. Simple.
Student: In that case, yes.
LS: All right, but . . .
Student: To take the case under consideration, one man is supposed to pay someone else.
If he doesn’t do it, then the other, after a year or so, can come back and tell him . . .
LS: Well, all right, but there is always a judge of the last instance, whoever it may be.
Student: So here the executors would be the rulers.
LS: No, no! They do what they are told. If so, then the cops would be the rulers. They
always do or are supposed to do what they are told.
Student: I had in mind the separation of church and state in particular. Remember the
difficulty at one time when the church would lay down rulings and the state wouldn’t
enforce them?
LS: Yes, but this difficulty doesn’t exist in a pagan society where there is no independent
priesthood. So I say there were certain little things which could be disposed of very
quickly because there is a clear hierarchy. And you come up ultimately to the law
wardens, and then in the last stage, the last section of the twelfth book, you see there is
something still higher than the law wardens, and that is the nocturnal council. So one
could say . . .
Student: That is what I was attempting to show.
LS: That is, of course, perfectly correct. And you said this very nicely to begin with.
There are two alternatives: philosopher kings [as in the] Republic; and the other
alternative is the Aristotelian one, ruling and being ruled at the same time: the citizen
body. Surely these are the two alternatives, and there you are absolutely right. And then
you made a very interesting remark; you said the ruling and being ruled is not so simple
here in Plato’s Laws because of the four classes. The highest class has an edge; it rules
more than the other classes do. Sure, and certainly more than the lowest class. And then
you made a very ingenious point when you made us think of the four classes in the
Republic, and of course that is very good; after all, it makes sense to call the richest class
the golden class, and the second richest the silver, and so on. You know the usual
explanation is this: that Plato took over here Solon’s arrangement, the old ancestral polity
of Athens. And that is true, but the question of course arises: Why did Plato choose
Solon’s? And the mere fact that he came from the same family as Solon, or that Solon
was his compatriot, is of course not sufficient in the case of a man of Plato’s intellectual
freedom. Therefore one can take this into consideration: that the hierarchy—gold, silver,
bronze, iron—reflects in the element of body the true hierarchy of perfect virtue and

396
more or less diluted virtue. That is a very good point, one for which I am grateful. I really
wish to emphasize that.
And then you made another point which is certainly not absurd but which I would like to
get a better understanding of. The Republic, you say, is the rule of philosophers; in the
Laws you say there is not a rule of philosophers (and that is demonstrably correct) but a
rule of philosophy, doctrine as distinguished from the living intelligence of the
philosophers. That there is a rule of doctrine can be very well defended, but is it
philosophy? You yourself made several qualifications.
Student: Yes, I said it was less than philosophy but more than a lie.
LS: Yes, that is a very good remark, I think. You say, in other words, that the doctrine,
while not being philosophic, has a higher degree of truth than the noble lie of the
Republic. And then either you said or I inferred—it doesn’t make any difference—that
the non-philosophers are intellectually better off in the Laws than they are in the
Republic. You meant that, surely?
Student: That is what it means, yes.
LS: And that is, I think, very good. Very good. Because in the Republic they are really
kept on the level of the noble lie and merely told these stories, whereas here, this natural
theology of the tenth book is the public teaching. That is extremely interesting, and I
think absolutely correct. And it fits in very nicely with certain things which we discussed
last time, namely, that in the Republic (if you remember that)1 spiritedness has a much
higher status than it has in the Laws. And this higher status of spiritedness in the Republic
is connected with the unnaturalness of the Republic. In the Laws we have a more natural
order of society, and accordingly the accepted teaching can be more in accordance with
nature; it can be more true. That, I think, is a very good remark.
These were the main points you made, and they were very well done. I am very grateful
for that. And then you linked it up with another point. I must think aloud in order to see
whether that is acceptable. You referred to the Tenth Book of the Republic, to the myth of
Er especially, and said that is not a part of the official teaching of the city of the Republic.
Although Socrates, Glaucon and the others talk this over—they, the founders—whether
the citizens will be told that story is absolutely . . .
Student: Exactly right.
LS: That is at least not certain. And you believe you can show that it cannot be a part of
the official teaching of the city of the Republic because this teaching would create a
danger to the rule of philosophers. That I did not quite understand.
Student: Well, first there is the problem of free will, the insinuation that everyone can
pick up their own life—
LS: After death. But that doesn’t help them now.

397
Student: But doesn’t that mean they make the choice as to the kind of everyday life they
lead? If they thought this, wouldn’t this affect the way they lead their everyday life?
LS: No, think of India. Let us start from a very practical proposition, the caste system.
This caste system means of course terrific hardships or deprivations for the lower class.
Now how can this be defended? And the Hindu answer is: They chose that way of life,
and therefore it serves them right. It is not unjust that this fellow is an Untouchable; he
chose that prenatally. I do not mean in the mother’s womb, even before that. And there is
something similar of course in the Republic. Everyone has chosen the character and the
nature which he possesses, and therefore he cannot complain, not only to the government
but even to a creator. The freedom of will doctrine is clearly stated in the second book in
the teaching addressed to the guardians. The reason is very simple: if there is no such
freedom, evil has to be traced to God or to the gods. And that leads to great difficulties,
because if the gods are the cause of evil, then they are not simply good. Then they cannot
act as models. Therefore another cause of evil must be found, and the morally most
useful view is that it is your fault, not the fault of anyone else. Your sin, either in yourself
or in an original sin—it doesn’t make any difference—is the cause of evil. Therefore I do
not regard this point as decisive, but another point occurs to me in this connection. The
myth of Er contains, in a very much disguised way, the Platonic cosmology. You know,
there is a description of the whole cosmos given in an entirely imaginative form. Take the
astronomy. This astronomy is given in the tenth and twelfth books of the Laws in an open
form. That would confirm your thought. The Laws are, in the public teaching, more open
to everyone than in the Republic. I think you established this point very well. It is very
remarkable that in this book, in which the word “philosophy” occurs a single time—
Student: Twice. In my book it occurs another time.
LS: In the translation?
Student: No.
LS: Then show it to me. You are absolutely right (967c8). Is it the only other passage in
which you found it? I see I overlooked it, because the subject matter is a reference to the
comic poets and it was so interesting to me that I did not see it. Thank you very much. Is
there any other reference to the word “philosophy”?
Student: No, only the other one to which we have already referred.
LS: I am not surprised that I missed this, since one cursory reading never suffices for
certainty in these matters. There may be some more references, but at any rate it is
extremely rare. There can be no question. Now that a dialogue of this length, in which the
word “philosophy” occurs, let us say, not more than four times at the outside, should
present to the citizens a philosophic or almost philosophic teaching, whereas in the
Republic the word “philosophy” occurs infinitely often, that a teaching addressed to the
citizens who are not philosophers is infinitely lower is a fact of the utmost interest. It is in
a way already a definition of what the laws mean.
Student: I tried to indicate that the citizens had more training in philosophy.

398
LS: That goes a bit too far, but surely the status of the nonphilosophic citizen is in the
Laws much higher with regard to philosophy than in the Republic. That is certainly true.
Now if someone else found any other reference to philosophy I would be extremely
grateful to hear of it.
That the life after death is less important in the Laws than in the Republic I believe one
can say, although it is of course mentioned, as you observed, in the tenth book.
Student: It comes out altogether there. They remove it almost entirely.
LS: Yes, especially in the twelfth book. That is true, and your linkup of this with the
issue of funerals is, I think, a very intelligent idea. But why is the doctrine of life after
death really a problem as far as the political aspect goes?
Student: Is it that it represents a court of appeals beyond the control of the philosophers?
LS: Yes, beyond the earthly polis. There is a reference in the twelfth book to the other
gods to which he will go. They are not the gods ruling the city. That is also in the
Apology.
Student: The auditor will go to the other gods.
LS: After death.
Student: Well, but does he die? Does he have to die? Can’t he become a nocturnal
council member?
LS: The nocturnal council are living human beings. They do not belong among them. I
don’t know whether I can bring it out now clearly, but the dialogue which is devoted to
the question of life after death is the Phaedo. That dialogue takes place on the day of
Socrates’s death. The good life is defined as learning to die. A depreciation of the body,
of this life, and hence of course also of the polis is very visible there. In other words, that
problem which is well known on the scale of universal history from the conflict between
otherworldly religions and the secular, worldly state. There is a tension here. But that
needs a long argument. Within the limits indicated, I think what you said was absolutely
right. But why did you speak about materialism all the time? That I did not understand.
Student: I used it as a comprehensive word, an understandable word. The argument
specifically comes from the sophistical arguments.
LS: But where does it come in in this overall argument regarding the character of the
Laws?
Student: Well, it is an attempt to improve materialistic arguments.
LS: But improving materialistic arguments is a very ambiguous term. It could mean a
better materialism.

399
Student: I think essentially that is what I had in mind.
LS: No, I think that is clearly wrong, because for Plato the soul and mind cannot be
understood as bodies. I mean, that they are essentially connected with the body is another
matter. If you mean by that materialism, that would go much too far. This subject will
come up in a certain passage of the twelfth book, as we shall see later.
And then what I didn’t understand at all is when you said the problem here has a certain
parallelism to the dogma of freedom of speech in modern society. That I didn’t
understand at all.
Student: I was using the wine incident as an example. In these wine parties, the purpose
is to give the people freedom of drink, and if it turns out that they are drunkards, then
they don’t let them drink anymore.
LS: In the Laws?
Student: In the Laws. On the other hand, if they are able to drink, are moderate men,
then this is found out and it is known that they can continue to let them drink. In modern
society they give us freedom of speech. We can talk as much as we like. If we say
something that is wrong, we can be persecuted or punished for it. On the other hand, if
we can speak and not say anything that anyone else would object to, then they let us
continue to speak freely. I think that is undeniable. It also has a funny effect on people in
that they all then tend to say much the same thing. I think I have heard the remark that
people in modern times, modern democracies, are very much alike. They are not as much
individuals; individuality does not run through our society.
LS: That is what some people say.
Student: It seems that freedom of speech contributes to that.
LS: Well, I do not quite see what you mean. I have no objection to your comparing
speaking to drinking because, for example, in both cases the mouth is involved, which is
not altogether negligible. And also, people become drunk by speaking just as they
become drunk by drinking, and there are probably more analogies. But the difference, I
think, is this: there is not this liberty of drinking in Plato’s Republic. Just as in the
Platonic Republic the freedom of speech comes in on the basis of very severe restrictions,
the freedom of drinking comes in only with very severe restrictions.
Student: But to return to my original narrative, I was using that as an example. Take the
tenth book which is, let us say, entirely available for people. There are other passages, but
take the tenth book in particular. You have all the arguments of an atheist; there are
many, many atheistical arguments there.
LS: No, the thesis of the atheist is stated. No arguments.

400
Student: And then a person can read these things. They are open to him; he can drink of
these things. Now granted, these arguments are weaker than the very strong arguments,
say, of the Athenian Stranger in . . .
LS: Well, that we don’t have to argue. But at any rate he sees the alternative.
Student: He sees the alternative. He can drink, and if this corrupts him you know what to
do with him. You punish him, or exile him, or something like that. On the other hand, if it
turns out that he follows the doctrine which is very plainly laid down there, and there is
no question that it is a doctrine, it has enforcement—
LS: There is not question about that. The first dogma in existence, at least in the Western
world. And then? If he behaves and is correct?
Student: If he behaves, he is just following the doctrine. He is doing what everyone did
at the drinking bouts. Granted, he isn’t getting very much.
LS: Oh, I see, that is what you mean. All right, I have nothing against that. In other
words, there is a certain wine judiciously made available to the citizen body which is not
made available to them in the Republic. That is true.
Student: I also mentioned Clinias in the first book with his talk about victory or war,
courage being the only virtuous thing. It is the same thing again . . .
LS: You mean as a bad . . .
Student: As a bad thing. Clinias himself introduces these atheistical arguments, or these
bad arguments.
LS: Without knowing it.
Student: But they are there for people to read.
LS: But you have to already put two and two together, and in this case 1 and 10 (meaning
book 1 and book 10) and then to see that Clinias’s position follows legitimately from the
atheistical position as presented in the tenth book. But we must now conclude our
discussion of your paper.
Now let us first turn to the plan of the twelfth book. I think it is always wise to try first to
get a clear plan. Now there is only one clear remark, and that occurs in 956b (page 523 in
Loeb) at the beginning of the paragraph.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And now that we have stated in detail what and how many the divisions of the
State as a whole must be, and have also stated to the best of our power the laws regarding
all the most important business transactions, it will be proper to deal next with judicial
procedure. (956b-c)

401
LS: Now let us stop here. That is the only remark of this kind in the twelfth book. And
that is very important because it tells us [that] up to now, after the conclusion of the
section on magistrates as well as on education, we dealt with business transactions. That
is certainly true from the beginning of book 11. And so all these subjects of the twelfth
book in particular, and of course of the eleventh, deal with business transactions, and that
is a problem. And now we come to the law courts and actions among citizens and so on,
but this is a difficulty. Look at the beginning of book 9 where it was said [of] law courts
and trials and actions. I only want to show that a very clear remark of Plato on the plan of
this last third of the Laws doesn’t jibe. The problem is to understand the relation between
the plan actually pursued and the plan indicated here. The ordinary explanation is, of
course, that Plato changed his mind while he wrote and then he died before he could
bring it into harmony. I am not in a position to solve this problem, but I would like to turn
now to an enumeration of the subjects of book 12, and while I do that to see whether this
makes sense. Quite externally stated: first, embassies and the large theft of public
property.
Now the connection between the two subjects is not too difficult. From time to time you
read something about what ambassadors, consuls, and other people do with public
money, even in our age. Now the second subject is war: war and the crucial importance
of strict obedience to the superiors, military discipline. No one must do anything while in
an army without having been commanded to do so, neither eating nor drinking nor
anything else. The same applies also with minor modification to peace. Here the only
connection I see is public property, public magistrates. In this connection one subject
comes up and takes up unusually large space, and that is the question of the deserter, in
the more precise form of the man who threw away his shield. You remember that that is
very extensively discussed, and Plato is very mild on that fellow, amazingly mild; we
shall see that later. The next subject is the audits of magistrates after they have completed
their term of office. The connection between theme two and three is not difficult to see,
because in both cases—[of] the man who throws away his shield and of the magistrate—
there can be failure for which the individual in question cannot be held responsible. You
have elected a very honest man as a magistrate, and then he simply is not up to his office.
I mean, he is not bright enough or he is not healthy enough, so it is a failure due to his
physis, his nature. Now the same consideration applies also to the man who threw away
his shield. You know, he may have had a failure of nerves or some other thing of the
same kind. Now the connection between soldiers and magistrates is clear from this point
of view. The first-rate soldiers as well as the first-rate magistrates are the citizens worthy
of the highest honor in the polis. So this is another form of the connection between these
two themes.
The fourth subject is oaths, and the point here reads very modern. By modern I mean
seventeenth century. The use of oath is severely limited, severely limited beyond what
was the constant practice at that time. And why was this limited? Why should not so
many oaths be demanded in judicial procedure as they are actually demanded? Why?
What is Plato’s decisive reason?
Student: The notion of the gods had changed.

402
LS: It had changed. That is the emphasis. Not because there is anything wrong with
oaths, but because the notions of gods had changed. In other words, there are many more
perjurers now than in the past, because people don’t believe any more in the gods to that
extent.
Student: . . .
LS: Yes, but that is extremely interesting because it has very far-reaching consequences.
We shall see this later. That is the truth underlying your remark about materialism. That
is too narrow a term, but unbelief is now much more common than it was in the past and
therefore the laws must be different. But the crucial implication of this is of course that
this applies not only to the provisions regarding oaths but2 is a tacit premise of the whole
code, naturally. The old codes were based on the premise that the codes were divinely
given by Zeus through Minos, by Apollo through Lycurgus. That was very gradually
undermined in the first book or books, as you may remember. And now the human
legislation, the legislation that does not pretend to be more than human legislation, the
whole of this is pervaded by the principle that beliefs in gods have changed. And of
course the crucial consequence is this: because the traditional belief in the gods can no
longer be counted upon, a new basis has to be found. This new basis is in the last resort
what? What is the new basis of legislation after the belief in gods has decayed? I mean,
there is only one alternative. It can no longer be believed as divine revelation—Minos
and so on. What takes its place? What is the foundation? If this works.
Student: Personal authority . . .
LS: But from which is that derived?
Student: Rich citizens.
LS: But how is the significance of wealth and wisdom to be established if it is not
established by divine revelation?
Student: By what is called doctrine.
LS: By philosophy. Let us not hesitate to use that word. Surely, to that extent, the
philosophic code. This foreshadows already the nocturnal council, which is a council of
philosophers, at the end of the book.
Now the next subject after oaths is emigration and immigration which covers that
important subject traveling. Is it necessary to elaborate that? I believe quite a few among
you can answer that question. What is the link between legislation regarding oaths and
travel? Yes?
Student: Other countries have other gods.
LS: Surely, and?
Student: . . .

403
LS: But still that does not explain to us the implication of the section on oaths. All right,
then if you are in another country, you swear by other gods. That’s all; that is the only
consequences which would follow from that. But it is really a very simple thought, and I
am sure that . . .
Student: To look for philosophy in other countries, is this what you mean?
LS: No. For example, but traveling is a condition of philosophy. I mean not necessarily
physical—Socrates never traveled as we know, but that was an accident, so to speak. But
without traveling, Socrates would have been impossible. Think of the examples which he
uses in the Laches. Someone says courage consists of always attacking and never
withdrawing, and then Socrates brings the example of the Scythian cavalry. How does he
know of the Scythian cavalry except because some people traveled there? The primary
way for realizing that the so-called values of one’s society are as such not natural—as
such, as the mere values of one’s society—is to see other societies. I mean even in
present-day relativism this is the most trivial argument.
Student: Are you saying this is a commonly held opinion then, or is your
interpretation—
LS: No, I would say it was a commonly held opinion then.
Student: At that time?
LS: Yes, and even before that.
Student: I was thinking about after that.
LS: No, before Odysseus. The wisdom of Odysseus is due to the fact that he traveled so
much, not only to Troy but afterwards because of his troubles. And he had known the
minds of many men. It is right at the beginning of the Odyssey. That is from the very
beginning.
The next subject—and that is very hard; I can only repeat the enumeration—contains
such subjects as security searches on other men’s property, a statute of limitations,
preventing by force people from appearing at a law court, at contests and games, and so
on and so on, and finally, votive offerings to the gods. I have been unable to discern a
principle there but I am sure that Plato did not do it without any rhyme or reason.
Student: With regard to the searching of other men’s properties, the person has to enter
under certain conditions naked before he can search. Would that remind in any way of
Aristophanes’s comedy The Clouds, where the person goes into Socrates “think tank” but
is informed by Socrates that he has to disrobe first?
LS: I don’t remember that. Certainly I would say that is an interesting confirmation that
there was such a legal provision in Athens. I didn’t think of that. Thank you. But
generally speaking disrobing, stripping, was used as a simile for learning or, for that
matter, for teaching. I give you a simple example. I stripped when I revealed my

404
ignorance regarding the second reference to philosophy. The grossest case is of course
examinations, where the soul, the ignorant soul, of the student is completely stripped in
the presence of the examiner. And the word gymnasium, which means the stripping
place, has immediate reference to the stripping for bodily exercise but it was applied also
to philosophic schools. The Pythagorean school is called, for example, in the Gorgias a
gymnasium. Why? The soul, the mind is stripped when you teach, learn, converse. It is
clear. No pretence. Even if a man is extremely clever in concealing his nakedness, sooner
or later he is found out.
Now I thought only of two possible passages as keys, and let us look at them. The first
(995c, page 521).
Reader:
[Ath.:] Everyone shall regard the friend or enemy of the State as his own personal friend
or enemy; and if anyone makes peace or war with any parties privately and without
public consent, in his case also the penalty shall be death—
LS: You see, that reminded me of an Aristophanean comedy, of the Acharnians, where a
man makes a private deal with the enemies. Now if you read on a bit.
Reader:
and if any section of the State makes peace or war on its own account with any parties,
the generals shall summon the authors of this action before the court, and the penalty for
him who is convicted shall be death. Those who are performing any act of service to the
State must do it without gifts; and it shall be no excuse nor laudable plea to argue that for
good deeds a man ought to receive gifts, though not for bad—
LS: That is interesting. That has, I think, also a contemporary flavor.
Reader:
to decide wisely, and firmly to abide by one’s decision, is no easy thing, and the safest
course is for a man to listen and obey the law, which says, “Perform no service for gifts.”
Whoso disobeys, if convicted by the court, shall be put to death once for all. (955b-d)
LS: “For all” is a gratuitous addition of the translator. He shall die once. Now you
remember there was a passage in 946e1 to 5, page 493?
Reader:
[Ath.:] but if he be convicted, in case the penalty imposed on him by the examiners be
death, he shall simply be put to death (one death only being possible), but in the case of
other penalties which admit of being doubled, he shall pay a double penalty. (946e)
LS: Yes, it is clear. In the case of a money fine it can be doubled; death you cannot
double. Does it remind you of another passage which we read?
Student: Yes, the passage that indicated atheists would die not once . . .

405
LS: The ironical atheists.
Student: Would not die one death and not two deaths.
LS: So in other words, either three or n deaths, or none. What I was trying to show is
only that there are certain very funny things, funny business, going on in this seemingly
very serious legislative enterprise, and one has to consider this in order to interpret it
properly. I cannot say more about this section than what I have said.
Now after this very mysterious section beginning with securities and ending with votive
offerings to the gods, he turns to judicial procedure.
Student: At the end of that it is interesting to note that Clinias is found agreeing that
reason is the first of the virtues. The section just after the votive offerings, 963.
LS: But that is much later.
Student: I’m sorry.
LS: And then he comes to judicial procedure again. This creates a problem because that
subject had been discussed before. And then the last subject, naturally. What is the end of
all human doings—the end in the simplest and most massive sense? What is that?
Student: Death.
LS: Sure. That is no value judgment whatever. And so in terms of the legislator, funerals,
that is the final subject. We begin really from birth—you remember, marriage and birth—
and end with death, as he had promised us in the first book. And there the legislation
proper is finished. And then we come to a broader consideration: how to preserve the
whole code. And the answer is given that there must be some new institution, the
nocturnal council, which is in fact identical with a group of philosophizing men. This
much about the plan. Now let us turn to the most interesting passages, at least as far as we
can cover them now. And let us first see at the beginning of the book.
Reader:
[Ath.:] If anyone, while acting as ambassador or herald, conveys false messages from his
State to another State, or fails to deliver the actual message he was sent to deliver, or is
proved to have brought back, as ambassador or herald, either from a friendly or hostile
nation, their reply in a false form,—against all such there shall be laid an indictment for
breaking the law by sinning againsts the sacred messages and injunctions of Hermes and
Zeus, and an assessment shall be made of the penalty they shall suffer or pay, if
convicted. (941a)
LS: Now wait a moment. I observed this only now: the first subject matter mentioned is
ambassadors; the last subject of book 11 was forensic rhetoric. Those of you who have
read certain other Platonic dialogues will have no difficulty in linking them up, these
teachers of rhetoric who are sent by their cities as ambassadors, like Hippias, Gorgias and
so on. Now read on here.

406

Reader:
[Ath.]: Theft of property is uncivilized, open robbery is shameless—
LS: “Uncivilized” is of course a somewhat British translation; “unbecoming a free man.”
Student: Ungentlemanly.
LS: “Unliberal” or “illiberal,” “unbecoming a free man.”
Reader:
neither of these has any of the sons of Zeus practiced, through delight in fraud or force.
Let no man, therefore, be deluded concerning this or persuaded either by poets or by any
perverse myth-mongers into the belief that, when he thieves or forcibly robs, he is doing
nothing shameful, but just what the gods themselves do. That is both unlikely and untrue;
and whoever acts thus unlawfully is neither a god at all nor a child of gods; and this the
lawgiver, as it behoves him, knows better than the whole tribe of poets. (941b-c)
LS: Let us stop here. So you see we come back to a great theme: the relation between
poets and legislators. And it is made clear here that the real judge in such matters is the
legislator and not the poet. He mentioned Hermes here, who was notorious for thievery.
That must of course be changed, because once a god can steal—and we must remember
the gods are of course models for men—the terrible consequence is obvious. You see, by
the way, that this sentence is rather ambiguous. No son of gods (beginning 941b) has ever
done anything of this deriving pleasure either by guile or compulsion. That doesn’t
completely exclude the possibility of theft, only of such theft as connected with deriving
pleasure from guile and corruption. There can be maybe other cases; at least it is an
ambiguous sentence. You see also the distinction he makes here between true and
plausible, as I would translate. Something could be true without being plausible and the
other way ’round. Now if you will read on a bit where you left off.
Reader:
[Ath.]: He, therefore, that hearkens to our speech is blessed, and deserves blessing for all
time; but he that hearkens not shall, in the next place, be holden by this law:—If anyone
steals any piece of public property, he shall receive the same punishment, be it great or
small. For he that steals a small thing steals with equal greed, though with less power,
while he that takes a large thing which he has not deposited does wrong to the full;
wherefore the law deems it right not to inflict a less penalty on the one offender than on
the other on the ground that his theft is smaller, but rather because the one is possibly still
curable, the other incurable.” (941c-d)
LS: Now let us stop here a moment. By the way, the word which he translates by “greed”
(c6) is in the original eros, and this has a very different meaning. “Passionate desire,” you
could perhaps say. And you see here also a very strange thing: the amount of the stolen
property is of no account. But why are there differences of punishment? That is a very
strange sentence which you read.

407
Student: . . .
LS: Surely not to begin with, but then he goes on to say that in the one case there is a
presumption of curability, and in the other case a presumption of incurability. That has
something to do with the whole problem of punishment which we have discussed before.
The true notion of punishment is cure: improvement [and] instruction for the curable and
extinction for the incurable, so that strictly speaking there could only be capital
punishment. The others would not get capital punishment; they would be sent to schools,
to a reform school which has not the character of any punitive institution. Now this
obviously doesn’t work. Now, how do you do it? In practice men make distinctions. Now
a certain crime, say, murder, is punished very severely and petty theft is punished very
lightly. But the murderer may be curable and the petty thief may be incurable. Do you
see? And therefore this shows that another consideration, say, protection of society,
enters, which has nothing to do with the consideration of improvement, and I think that
finds expression in this very strange sentence, that there should be a kind of presumption
of curability in the case of the3 [lighter] crime and of incurability in the case of the 4
[heavier] crime. Now read on where you left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So if anyone convict in a court of law either a resident alien or a slave of stealing
any piece of public property, in his case, since he is probably curable, the court shall
decide what punishment he shall suffer or what fine he shall pay. But in the case of a
citizen, who has been reared in the way he is to be reared,—if he be convicted of
plundering or doing violence to his fatherland, whether he has been caught in the act or
not, he shall be punished by death, as being being practically incurable. (941d-9442a)
LS: That is reasonably translated, “practically incurable.” And here also, it is presumably
curable in the other case. Why is [there] the presumption of curability in the case of the
foreigner and not in the case of the citizen?
Student: Because the citizen has undergone the proper training.
LS: Yes. But Plato points out that this is legal presumption and while it has a great
plausibility, it is of course not simply true. And all these legal presumptions on which
judges act are not, strictly speaking, true. Another indication of the make-believe
character of the legal world. We have spoken of the most massive make-believe, and that
is the formulation “He who does this and this will be punished this and this way,” which
is never true, as we know, unless you add “if he is caught.” This the legislator cannot
possibly add without making himself ridiculous. Every legal presumption is an element
of plausible untruth. But without legal presumptions, law would be impossible. It would
be infinitely cumbersome; you wouldn’t arrive at any general rules which could guide
judges and juries.
Student: In the case of temple robbing, the slave is punished much lighter than the
citizen, but in the case of murder the slave is punished much more severely than the
citizen would be.

408
LS: Yes, because the slaves are a danger to the masters. You know, this element of
compulsion inherent in slavery requires a particularly severe punishment for slaves in
certain cases. That has nothing to do with any intention to improve the slave.
Student: . . .
LS: But generally speaking slaves were treated much more harshly in these matters.
Student: But in the two examples—say, temple robbing, if a citizen5 [were] to do this it
would be perhaps much more disruptive to the whole system than if a slave were to do
it . . .
LS: And he doesn’t count, somehow. Sure. I don’t deny that there are very good reasons
for these provisions. What I am interested in is only that they do not jibe with the strict
Platonic notion of what rational punishment is.
Student: The example I gave is one where they clearly do not jibe with the question of
improvement.
LS: Surely, and therefore a precise analysis would have to elaborate those principles of
punishment which differ from the allegedly only rational principle, namely, that of
improvement. Take this in connection with the whole problem of the Laws which I stated
before: law is not identical with rationality. It tends to be but it can never be. There is a
ceiling, and to find out that ceiling and its precise formulation would be the solution to
the problem: What is the polis? Because the polis is constituted by these ceilings beyond
which the polis as polis can never go, and yet which are not simply rational.
We turn now to a somewhat later passage (943d4) which is in the midst of a very long
speech.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Every man, when bringing an action against another, ought rightly to dread
bringing upon him, whether intentionally or unintentionally, a wrongful punishment (for
Justice is, and has been truly named, the daughter of Reverence, and falsehood and wrong
are naturally detested by Reverence and Justice); and he should beware also of
trespassing against Justice in any matter, and especially in respect of loss of arms in
battle, lest by mistakenly abusing such losses as shameful, when they are really
unavoidable, he may bring undeserved charges against an undeserving man.
LS: You see, the subject mater is the man who throws away his shield or loses his arms,
and that needn’t be an act of cowardice: it can be produced, for example, simply by being
overwhelmed by many people and being deprived of one’s arms, and all kinds of things.
Now go on.
Reader:

409
It is by no means easy to draw distinctions between such cases; but none the less the law
ought to try by some means to distinguish case from case. In illustration we may cite the
story of Patroclus: suppose that he had been brought to his tent without his arms and had
recovered—as has happened in the case of thousands,—while the arms he had had
(which, as the poet relates, had been given to Peleus by the gods, as a dowry with Thetis)
were in the hands of Hector,—then all the base men of those days would have been free
to abuse Menoetios’ son for loss of arms. (943d-944a)
LS: Stop here. Menoetios’s son is Patroclus. You see, here he refers to a possible
Homeric story, namely, that Patroclus had not been killed but only sent home without his
arms by Hector, or it might have happened by any other accident. The subject here was
touched already in book 4 or 5—the legislator being taught by poets about the great
variety of possibilities he has to take into consideration when giving his laws. So you
have this twofold relation, and this is only another aspect of the fundamental problem: the
poet is subject to the legislator. That is simple, for example, censorship. There is always
the other thing, the legislator subject to the poet.
Student: But the poet written by . . .
LS: Sure. That is quite good. But still, to some extent don’t underestimate the poet, even
from Plato’s point of view. Some things they know which the mere legislator, the
unenlightened legislator, might not know. That is only one illustration of the fundamental
equation and non-equation underlying the book. The fundamental equation or nonequation being: intelligence, nous, equal and unequal to nomos, law. To the extent to
which they are identical, the poet will of course be subject to the legislator. But since they
are not identical, there is always the necessity (or possibility, at any rate) of appealing
from the nomos to true understanding, and this true understanding is to some extent of
course possessed by the poets. So that this ambiguity is just one of the infinite variety of
ambiguities going through the whole book, and yet which are not due to any carelessness
or so on; they have a common principle. And once one has understood that, one will not
find a difficulty with these passages of the Laws, at any rate.
We make now a big jump to 948b (page 497).
Reader:
[Ath.:] Rhadamanthys deserves admiration for the way in which, as we are told, he
judged cases of law, in that he perceived that the men of his time had a clear belief in the
existence of gods,—and naturally so, seeing that most men at that time were the offspring
of gods,—
LS: And he was one of these.
Reader:
he himself among others, as the story declares.

410
LS: You laugh. If you were forced to justify your laughing, you might get into deep
waters. What is wrong with that, that there should [be] Rhadamanthus (a brother of
Minos, by the way), a man who was a god at a certain time? With what right do you
laugh? One could very well ask that. There are things between heaven and earth of which
your philosophy doesn’t dream.ii If you have a god around that you know is really a god,
isn’t this the simplest proof that there are gods? Now he knows that he is a god. He
knows that. I believe that you are right in laughing because Plato, I think, meant it
ironically. But it needs an argument. Our mere impression of irony is not yet a proof.
Now go on.
Reader:
Probably he thought that he ought not to entrust lawsuits to any man, but only to gods,
from whom he obtained verdicts that were both simple and speedy; for he administered
an oath to the disputants regarding each matter in dispute, and thus secure a speedy and
safe settlement. But nowadays, when, as we say, a certain section of mankind totally
disbelieve in gods, and others hold that they pay no regard to us men, while a third party,
consisting of the most and worst of men, suppose that in return for small offerings and
flatteries the gods lend them aid in committing large robberies, and often set them free
from great penalties,—under such conditions, for men as they now are, the device of
Rhadamanthys would no longer be appropriate in actions at law. Since, therefore, the
opinions of men about the gods have changed, so also must their laws change.
LS: That is a remarkable sentence. One great principle of modern historical scholarship
was fully known to Plato, as you see. Continue.
Reader:
In real actions iii laws that are framed intelligently ought to debar both litigants from
taking oaths; he that is bringing an action against anyone ought to write down his
charges, but swear no oath, and the defendant in like manner ought to write down his
denial and hand it to the magistrates without an oath. For truly it is a horrible thing to—
(948b-d)
LS: I think we don’t need all of this. The main point is clear. A fundamental change, a
change in the most important respect has taken place. Legislation must follow that, and
that, as I said before, is a key to the whole work, not only to the legislation regarding
oaths. That is such a basic change that it is bound to affect everything.
Student: There is another change from Rhadamanthus’s day. Rhadamanthus’s people
could never have handed in a written brief. He is asking for written briefs. Rhadamanthus
was presumably dealing with illiterates.

ii

“There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, Than are dreamt of in your philosophy.”
William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act 1, scene 5.
iii
In the Loeb: “in legal actions”

411
LS: I think you are right. I think reference to writings occurs in the Minos only when he
speaks of the brother, Calos, who was the judge in the outlying villages. Rhadamanthus,
judging in the cities, had nothing to do with written statements. That is, I think, what he
says in the Minos, which we discussed at the beginning of the course. Now let us turn a
bit further on (949e, page 501). That is another great subject.
Reader:
[Ath.:] For a state which makes no moneyiv except from the produce of its soil, and which
does not engage in commerce, it is necessary to determine what action it ought to take
regarding the emigration of its citizens to outside countries and the admission of aliens
from elsewhere. In giving counsel concerning these matters the lawgiver must begin by
using persuasion, so far as he can. The intermixture of States with States naturally results
in a blending of characters of every kind, as strangers import among strangers novel
customs: and this result would cause immense damage to peoples who enjoy a good
polity under right laws; but the majority of States are by no means well governed, so that
to them it makes no difference if their population is mixed through the citizens admitting
strangers and through their own members visiting other States whenever any one of them,
young or old, at any time or place, desires to go abroad. Now for the citizens to refuse
altogether either to admit others or to go abroad themselves is by no means a possible
policy, and, moreover, it would appear to the rest of the world to be both churlish and
cross-grained, since they would get the reputation of adopting harsh language, such as
that of the so-called “Aliens Expulsion Acts,” and—
LS: That expulsion of foreigners which had been periodic in Sparta. Continue.
Student: There seems to have been a question asked here, although not recorded.
LS: Now let me see. No, not only such a city. Later on he says cities not regulated by
good laws; there it doesn’t make any difference.
Student: He is contrasting the strictly agricultural state here.
LS: No, he says that a tolerably self-sufficient state with good laws must pay attention to
that problem. [In] a city like Athens . . . with bad laws and very easy-going, there it
doesn’t make such a great difference. Now go on where you left off.
Reader:
methods both tyrannical and severe; and reputation in the eyes of others, whether for
goodness or the reverse, is a thing that should never be lightly esteemed. For the majority
of men, even though they be far removed from real goodness themselves, are not equally
lacking in the power of judging whether others are bad or good; and even in the wicked
there resides a divine and correct intuition, whereby a vast number even of the extremely
wicked distinguish aright, in their speech and opinions, between the better men and the
worse. Accordingly, for most States, the exhortation to value highly a good public
iv

There was a break in the tape at this point. The text from 949e-950b is supplied here in full.

412
reputation is a right exhortation. The most correct and most important rule is this,—that
the man who pursues after a good reputation should himself be truly good, and that he
should never pursue it without goodness (if he is to be really a perfect man); and
furthermore, as regards the State we are founding in Crete, it would well become it to
gain for itself in the eyes of the rest of the world the best and noblest reputation— (949e950b)
LS: Let us stop here. Does this thought remind you of something of which you are much
more familiar? A very well known formula.
Student: Practice what you preach.
LS: No, no, not quite as common, but very well known. You all read it in school.
Student: Know thyself.
LS: No. “A decent respect for the opinion of mankind.” That is the formula from the
Declaration of Independence. And one can perhaps say that that is probably the most
simple criterion for distinguishing between civilized and uncivilized peoples: whether
they have such a respect, a decent respect for the opinions of other peoples. So that is
clear, but Plato makes this qualification: that it is good or noble for most cities—for many
cities rather—to esteem highly good reputation with the many outside the city. In other
words, it cannot be the highest criterion. There may be a perfect city of outstanding
[virtue] which for this reason has a bad reputation, because it is very hard to live in.
Think of Calvin’s Geneva, or some other places where virtue was practiced properly.
Quite a few people find this unpleasant, and Plato makes allowance for that. A bad
reputation for moral severity is of course no objection. And also what Plato says here
about all men in a way—that they know very well the difference between good and bad,
although they don’t act on it—that is also a remarkable statement. And they even praise
the virtuous. Not only6 [do] they know it, they praise the virtuous and blame the vicious,
but it doesn’t affect their actions. Montesquieu expressed this in a very charming way. Do
you remember it?
Student: Men, rascals in retail, are wholesale very decent people; they love morality. v
LS: Yes. In other words, an open denial of the principle of morality would be absolutely
shocking to them, and yet as far as their own action goes that is another matter. It was
once presented very nicely by Humphrey Bogart when he played a famous killer and
gangster, and was morally shocked by a flippant remark of an “intellectual” to an old
man. He was simply shocked by this improper attitude of the younger man to an older
man. That is one illustration of that. I suppose there are others.
Now the law is [that] people should be sent out by our city—where does this begin? Read
from there.
v

Charles de Secondat Montesquieu, The Spirit of Laws, book 35, chapter 5, “Of Laws in Relation
to the Establishment of Religion and its External Polity.”

413
Reader:
[Ath.:] First, no man under forty years old shall be permitted to go abroad to any place
whatsoever; next, no man shall be permitted to go abroad in a private capacity, but in a
public capacity permission shall be granted to heralds, embassies, and certain
commissions of inspection. Military expeditions in war it would be improper to reckon
among official visits abroad.
LS: Isn’t that nice. Those of you who were in South Korea or other places will remember
this.
Reader:
It is right that embassies should be sent to Apollo at Pytho and to Zeus at Olympia, and to
Nemea and the Isthmus, to take part in the sacrifices and games in honour of these
gods— (950d-e)
Student: Does he mean that everyone who competes in the athletic contests will be over
forty?
LS: No, I think7 [he means those] in charge of these groups.
Student: Why doesn’t he mention Neptune, the god of the other two games?
LS: I don’t know. Well, what could you think? That is a perfectly legitimate question.
Why does he mention Apollo and Zeus and not Poseidon?
Student: These are the three great games: Nemean, Isthmian, Olympian.
LS: But to which god are they [dedicated]?
Student: They are dedicated, I believe to these gods, I don’t believe there are any games
dedicated to Poseidon.
LS: Why do you raise the question?
Student: I thought it might be significant.
LS: I think you are right. There is something missing here. It is certainly [an] unequal
construction. [To] Pytho to Apollo, to Olympia for Zeus, and to Nemea and to the
Isthmus.
Student: I don’t think that either the Nemean or Isthmian games had one honorary deity.
LS: I see. That might be the simple explanation. I do not know, and therefore I can’t say.
First one has to find the fact, and if the fact is [found], then you seek a reason. But if the
fact doesn’t exist, then it is a waste of time to seek a reason. Continue.
Reader:

414
to take part in the sacrifices and games in honour of these gods; and it is right also that
the ambassadors thus sent should be, so far as is practicable, as numerous, noble and
good as possible,—men who will gain for the State a high reputation in the sacred
congresses of peace, and confer on it a glorious repute that will rival that of its warriors;
and these men, when they return home, will teach the youth that the political institutions
of other countries are inferior to their own. (950e-951a)
LS: Yes. Mark that. Why should they do that?
Student: They wouldn’t want the youth thinking otherwise.
LS: But if it is not true?
Student: Well, they would want to change them if they know that other institutions—
LS: Yes, sure, but let us assume they did find in other places a better institution.
Student: Well, it would be possible to incorporate it and not tell the youths 8 [where it]
came [from].
LS: So in other words, it is a simple example of the noble lie again. We must never forget
that. The official teaching is in favor of preservation, and change requires very special
precautions. He speaks of that in the immediate sequel. Continue.
Reader:
Also, they ought to send out other inspecting commissioners (when they have obtained
leave from the Law-wardens) of the following kind:—If any of the citizens desire to
survey the doings of the outside world in a leisurely way, no law shall prevent them; for a
State that is without experience of bad men and good would never be able (owing to its
isolation) to become fully civilized and perfect— (951a-b)
LS: “Civilized” is here literally translated “tamed.” According to Plato and Aristotle,
man is a tame animal, contrary to certain modern notions in Nietzsche and other places
that man is a wild animal. You know how they proved that in former times, that man is a
tame animal by nature? A very simple anatomical consideration. For example, the teeth.
Man doesn’t have the teeth of a lion or of a jackal or what have you. There is a passage in
one of the books by Spenglervi on technology in which he describes the enjoyment of
biting another man in the throat. I’m sure that quite a few creatures [are] like that, but
man is simply not built that way. And that is what they meant when they spoke of man’s
essential tameness, which of course can become something very different if not
reinforced by education. But tame is the word. It sounds ridiculous, this simple example,
but one must not underestimate those lessons which anatomy supplies. Continue.
Reader:
vi

Oswald Spengler (1880-1936), German historian and philosopher, author of The Decline of the
West (1926).

415
fully tamed and perfect, nor would it be able to safeguard its laws unless it grasped them,
not by habit only, but also by conviction. Amongst the mass of men there always exists—
albeit in small numbers—men that are divinely inspired—”
LS: Not “divinely inspired” but “divine men.” That was for the Greeks not such a strange
expression as it is for us.
Reader:
intercourse with such men is of the greatest value, and they spring up in badly-governed
States just as much as [in] those that are well governed.
LS: You see the application to the people speaking. After all, it is an Athenian who
speaks.
Reader:
In search of these men it is always right for one who dwells in a well-ordered State to go
forth on a voyage of enquiry by land and sea, if so be that he himself is incorruptible, so
as to confirm thereby such of his native laws as are rightly enacted, and to amend any that
are deficient. For without this inspection and enquiry a State will not permanently remain
perfect, nor again if the inspection be badly conducted. (951b-c)
LS: What he translated by “inspection” here and in the sequel is in Greek always theoria,
which means originally a procession, something very solemn at which you look. You
don’t do anything but look at, and then it became enlarged in meaning and meant
“contemplation.”
Student: . . .
LS: But there, of course, these basic laws cannot be changed, and if he would come back
he would be sent to the reformatory. Then he would be corrupted. That couldn’t happen.
That couldn’t happen to Democritus, I believe, either. But now we must make a big jump
and turn to 959a4 (page 531 bottom).
Reader:
[Ath.:] As in other matters it is right to trust the lawgiver, so too we must believe him
when he asserts that the soul is wholly superior to the body—
LS: By the way, if one wants to translate literally: “wholly different from the body.” It is
quite true that in Greek the meaning “different,” the primary meaning [of] “different”
easily takes on the meaning “excellent.” Differently wealthy means then extremely
wealthy. But the literal meaning is “differently,” and it is perhaps better to translate it this
way, especially in our present case. In other words, one must never do this—in
translating a Platonic passage, especially if it is easily translatable, one must not read in
all one’s wisdom about what Plato teaches in other places. That is not proper. It makes it
much more even than it is meant to be. Go on.

416
Reader:
and that in actual life what makes each of us to be what he is is nothing else than the soul,
while the body is a semblance which attends on each of us, it being well said that the
bodily corpses are images of the dead, but that which is the real self of each of us, and
which we term the immortal soul, departs to the presence of other gods, there (as the
ancestral law declares) to render its account,—a prospect to be faced with courage by the
good, but with uttermost dread by the evil. But to him who is dead no great help can be
given; it was when he was alive that all his relatives should have helped him, so that
when living his life might have been as just and holy as possible, and when dead he might
be free during the life which follows this life from the penalty for wickedness and sin.
This being so, one ought never to spend extravagantly on the dead, through supposing
that the carcase of flesh that is being buried is in the truest sense one’s own relative; but
one ought rather to suppose that the real son or brother—or whoever else it may be that a
man fancies himself to be mournfully burying—has departed in furtherance and
fulfillment of his own destiny, and that it is our duty to make a wise use of what we have
and to spend in moderation, as if it were on a soulless altar to the gods below: and what
constitutes moderation the lawgiver will most properly define.vii (959a-d)
LS: Let us stop here. Now what do you make9 [of] this passage, where the immortality of
the soul is clearly taught?
Student: Yes, in the case of the auditors this is not even mentioned. Does that make any
difference?
LS: Yes, but I don’t see why it shouldn’t be true of the auditors what is true of other
human beings. Why should auditors be less immortal than others? You would have to
back [that] up.10
Student: I was not so concerned with what he said himself, but I was looking . . .
LS: Yes, I also somehow don’t believe that Plato believed in this way in the immortality
of the soul, but that is a mere private opinion without any value if it is not backed up by
any argument.
Student: I was looking for a few loopholes. I found one or two, I thought.
LS: Which?
Student: It says, “departs in the presence of other gods.”
LS: Well, the Cronic gods, the infernal gods, the gods of the lower or nether world. It
could be Pluto and Persephone.
Student: Well, if the nocturnal council supplied the gods, then man could go to the gods.

vii

In the Loeb: “properly divine.”

417
LS: These are very ingenious guesses, but as such without any value. I just wanted to
point out this point. I remind you only of this here—now we get the law regarding
funerals, and that, as I said before, was the key example for good law.
Student: He provides penalties; that’s another reason, I think. Doesn’t he have law
enforcement here which punishes them if they go to altars other than their own?
LS: But it is the living.
Student: That’s true.
LS: Sure, if a man who erects a fantastic monument for his departed is punished, the
departed is not punished. Even if the departed should have made this part of his
testament, he could not be punished, at least not by the earthly, the human legislator. We
come now gradually to the key subject of the end of the book. We begin with the last
sentence of page 537.
Reader:
[Ath.:] And this, as it seems clear to me, is what our laws still lack—namely, a right
mode of naturally implanting in them this irreversible quality. (960d)
LS: What does “naturally” mean here? In other words, the code as we have it now in its
completed form or practically completed form does not have a guarantee of its survival in
itself of its unchangeability. Now this quality, this power, is to be implanted into that kata
physin, according to nature.
Student: Telos? Thus to have its end?
LS: Surely, but the question of the end has not yet arisen, or rather we knew the end all
the time: the four virtues and the divine good and the human good—no, “in a way
corresponding to the nature of man,” I would translate it. We must see that human
possibility which allows us to get unchangeability. That we have not yet answered. The
answer of course is the nocturnal council. Living intelligence alone can preserve the city,
and therefore we have to look for that. The living intelligence which has been provided
for up to now is insufficient; merely political intelligence is insufficient. There must be
something higher. But we come to that. We turn then to 961d at the beginning.
Reader:
[Ath.:] One ought to observe, Clinias, in regard to every object, in each of its operations,
what constitutes its appropriate saviour—as, for example, in an animal, the soul and the
head are eminently such by nature.
[Clin.:] How do you mean?
[Ath.:] Surely it is the goodness of those parts that provides salvation to every animal.
[Clin.:] How?
[Ath.:] By the existence of reason in the soul, in addition to all its other qualities, and by
the existence of sight and hearing, in addition to all else, in the head; thus, to summarize

418
the matter, it is the combination of reason with the finest senses, and their union in one,
that would most justly be termed the salvation of each animal. (961d)
LS: Here one thing is clear. By the way, “reason” is not a good translation. One should
say “intelligence” or “mind”—intelligence plus the noblest senses. It is not intelligence
alone; that is insufficient. Sense experience is essentially necessary for that. Why does
Clinias have such a difficulty in understanding that at the beginning? Why is it he doesn’t
understand this simple thing, that soul and head are the most important for the
preservation of a living being? Should he still believe that claws and such things are more
important for the preservation of a living being?
Student: Doesn’t he think of god? Remember the passage where he says you go beyond
the laws in the tenth book? So that he has his mind on these theological things.
LS: I wonder. I mean, it occurs to me now that Plato 11 [says] that in a living being, not
only in man, the soul and the head should be most important. Could one not as a very
simple man say no, that a lion and other animals depend much more on the other things
for his defence?
Student: But on the other hand, the senses direct the use of the lion’s claws and other
things. He would be utterly useless without his head.
LS: Yes, if he were blind and so on. But still, we are trying to understand Clinias and he
must have here a difficulty which I, for example, did not have, and one must try to
understand that. My tentative suggestion is that he is thinking primarily of the immediate
weapons of offense and defense rather than of the guiding power. I do not know whether
that is true.
Student: . . .
LS: That is no problem for anyone at that time, because soul means that by virtue of
which a living being lives. You see a body; something is missing—I mean, let us take a
body of a being which just died. It is in a way the same dog, and yet something is missing
that has disappeared from it by virtue of which it lived. This thing which you don’t see
and which you can perhaps think [of] for a moment as the breath, the last breath which
came out of it, that is the soul. That is the primary meaning of soul. So in this sense
everyone spoke of soul at that time, and12 [the] characteristic assertion of Plato is that the
distinction between soul and body must be taken seriously, that the soul is not in any
sense body or bodily. For example, when you say soul is breath, or as the Old Testament
has it in a passage, soul is blood, viii then clearly the soul is one kind of body. What Plato
insists upon is that the soul is in no sense body, although it doesn’t exist independently of
a body. Now let us go on where we left off.
Student: Could Clinias’s denseness have been brought in by way of an argument? Here
this man has been taught the sound doctrine as to how to legislate for the entire day, and
still—
viii

Leviticus 17:14.

419
LS: No, no. We find [that out] later on, no. He is not tired. That I believe I can prove to
you later. He is not tired. Now go on.
Reader:
[Clin.:] Surely this is good.ix
[Ath.:] It is probable. But what kind of reason is it which, when combined with senses,
will afford salvation to ships in stormy weather and calm? On shipboard is it not the pilot
and the sailors who, by combining the senses with the pilot reason, secure salvation both
for themselves and for all that belongs to the ship?
[Clin.:] Of course.
[Ath.:] There is no need of many examples to illustrate this. Consider, for instance, what
would be the right mark for a general to set up to shoot at in the case of any army, or the
medical profession in the case of a human body, if they were aiming at salvation. Would
not the former make victory his mark, and mastery over the enemy, while that of the
doctors and their assistants would be the providing of health to the body?
[Clin.:] Surely.x (961d-962a)
LS: You have now three examples of three arts which frequently occur together: [those
of] the pilot, the general, and the physician. These three arts have something in common.
They are particularly important for saving life [in the face of] dangerous things, e.g.,
seafaring, [and] battle; and the physicians, naturally, because they are supposed to
preserve life. Now you see in the central case, in the case of the general, he does not
mention the subordinates as he does in the two other cases. In the case of the ship he
mentions both the pilot and the sailor; in the case of the physician he mentions both the
physician and his assistants, but not in the case of the general. That I think is an
indication, I believe, to the problem of the unity, the single man in control, whereas there
is a division of the ruling element in the two other cases. At any rate that needs a
discussion.
Student: Isn’t it almost superfluous to mention that generals have armies?
LS: Now let me see why. In the first case when he speaks of the pilots, he speaks also of
the objects, namely weapons or ships; and in the second case he mentions armies; and in
the third case he does not mention 13 [them]. He doesn’t say that physicians deal with the
body.
Student: But it is there.
LS: How does he translate it? “Every medical service strives correctly after salvation.”
He doesn’t speak of the body here. In the first formulation, he does not speak of the
physician; he speaks of medical service.
Student: This reminded me of the physician in the Republic.

ix
x

In the Loeb: “That is certainly probable.”
In the Loeb: “Certainly.”

420
LS: But let us first see that. And later on in the same paragraph he distinguishes between
the medics and the servants, the medic’s servant. That is a little problem. I don’t know.
But surely that is one of the many things which would need attention.
Now in 962d to e we find a remarkable passage about the vulgar legislators which has a
parallel in Aristotle’s Politics. We might read that passage.
Reader:
[Ath.:] So now we shall understand that it is by no means surprising if the legal customs
in the States keep shifting, seeing that different parts of the codes in each State look in
different directions. And, in general, it is not surprising that, with some statesmen, the
aim of justice is to enable a certain class of people to rule in the State (whether they be
really superior, or inferior), while with others the aim is how to acquire wealth (whether
or not they be somebody’s slaves); and others again direct their efforts to winning a life
of freedom. Still others make two objects at once the joint aim of their legislation,—
namely, the gaining of freedom for themselves, and mastery over other States; while
those who are the wisest of all, in their own conceit, aim not at one only, but at the sum
total of these and the like objects, since they are unable to specify any one object of preeminent value towards which they would desire all else to be directed. (962d-e)
LS: That would have to be analyzed very closely, because we can recognize issues in
modern thought very well, especially in point five—everything together and then one
thing preferred at a time without any hierarchy. Let us read the immediate sequel.
Reader:
[Clin.:] This Stranger,xi was not the view we stated long ago the right one? We said that
all our laws must always aim at one single object, which, as we agreed, is quite rightly
named “virtue.”
[Ath.:] Yes.
[Clin.:] And we stated that virtue consists of four things.
[Ath.:] Certainly.
[Clin.:] And that the chief of all the four is reason, at which the other three, as well as
everything else, should aim. (963a)
LS: Now let us stop at this. Is it not extraordinary, this passage? Why did those of you
who laughed, laugh?
Student: Clinias is playing the role of tutor here.
LS: Was this also your impression? Yes, an extraordinary scene. It is very rare that
another man plays the role of Socrates. You see, that is the reason I did not believe in
tiredness. That is very amazing. Clinias has reached the stage where he can catechize the
Athenian Stranger, and one could give some illustrations from the sequel. But that is,
however, only the prelude to his complete defeat. The questions the Athenian now begins
to consider are completely beyond his depth, and I think it illustrates very well how really
xi

In the Loeb: “Then, Stranger”

421
bright Clinias is, and yet [he has] not an inkling of what is beyond that sphere of the
political in the narrower sense.
Student: Isn’t it significant that just three pages ago Clinias was having trouble getting
hold of what it is that keeps an animal going?
LS: Yes, but could this not be connected? Could it not be that he still somehow has this
simple notion of life, of man, of the city as a group of human beings united for defending
themselves, and that this primary function somehow still appears to him as the highest
function? Could this not be a definition of the political man in the narrower sense—in the
strict sense?
Now we come of course into very deep water and we can read only a few passages. Will
you read on where you left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] You follow us admirably, Clinias; and now follow us in what comes next. In the
case of the pilot, the doctor, and the general, reason is directed, as we said, towards the
one object of aim which is proper in each case; and now we are at the point of examining
reason in the case of a statesman, and, addressing it as a man, we shall question it thus:—
“O admirable sir, what is your aim? Medical reason is able to state clearly the one single
object at which it aims; so will you be unable to state your one object—you who are
superior, as perhaps you will say, to all the wise?” Can you two, Megillus and Clinias,
define that object on his behalf, and tell me what you say it is, just as I, on behalf of many
others, defined their objects for you?
[Clin.:] We are totally unable to do so. (963a-c)
LS: Now what is the difficulty? What is the precise difficulty? You must not forget that
Clinias has accepted the teaching as defined in the first book (he has a remarkable
memory): there are the human goods, and above them the divine goods. The divine goods
are the virtues. And14 controlling and commanding among them is intelligence, nous. So
what is the end? What is the end of this state, if we want to speak of the one controlling
end? It is obvious. Nous! Intelligence! What is the difficulty? In other words, that the
statesman should try to the best of his powers to make the citizen intelligent, thoughtful,
sophos. Surely, there are an infinite number of corollaries, that is clear; that we know
already. But is it not a clear statement of the end as [it is] in itself? What is the difficulty?
It is indicated. Intelligence, yes, but what is intelligence about? Will we understand
intelligence if we don’t know what it is about? There is intelligence also in medicine, as
there is intelligence in statesmanship. But what is intelligence itself about? The object of
intelligence, that we do not know. And therefore we talk very vaguely.
Student: Doesn’t it follow then that the use of this analogy of the pilot, the general or the
physician doesn’t really tell us what we need to know about reason?
LS: It tells us one very important thing: that in every art there is one controlling end.
Student: In every art?

422
LS: In every art, sure. The political art, the most comprehensive of all arts, also has one
controlling end. Otherwise we have complete chaos.
Student: But if the political art doesn’t have this end in the same sense in which these
others have an end, then these others cannot serve as a proper analogy.
LS: Yes, and a political art wouldn’t exist if it doesn’t have such an end. It wouldn’t be
an art. But that it is an art is admitted, for example, even today. Whatever the relativists
may say, as soon as they begin to talk politically and speak about American politics or
politics based on democracy, for example, that end is clearly indicated with sufficient
clarity—not with full clarity—by the word “freedom.” That is of course not the Platonic
answer. Sure[ly] not. But it is also an end which is understood, qualified practically in n
different ways—that goes for Plato too—as that in the light of which we ultimately judge.
We judge, using this, whether that is a nice society or not a nice society.
Student: Well, the thing I’m objecting to in the use of this analogy by Plato—and he
doesn’t only use it here, as you pointed out—is that all these other things are technical
arts, skills which you can learn about objects which are quite readily available. But the
political art is not this kind of technical skill.
LS: But how do you know? Plato doesn’t speak of technical arts. He would say
ministerial arts and ruling arts. Surely a ruling art will be different from all ministerial
arts, say, shoemaking. Shoemaking is necessarily a ministerial art because no man in his
senses can find in the protection of his feet against sharp stones his fulfillment. To do so
he would have to be a very crazy man.
Student: I agree that this is perfectly true meaning of a ministerial art, but the question is
whether politics is this sort of thing. Is the political art this kind of art?
LS: The question is whether politics can reach so high as to be the truly ruling art,
whether it has not severe limitations.
Student: Well, that is another question.
LS: But that it is a higher art and has a broader sweep than shoemaking . . .
Student: Well, if it is a higher art, can these others serve logically as the analogy for it?
LS: Any rational activity presupposes a singleness of the end, so that in case of doubt
you know which end has in principle the right of way. An art is defined, we may say, by
rationality. But if the very principle of a given pursuit is irrationality, namely, that you
have to gamble all the time and (how do you say?) throw dice, then it cannot be an art.
But then it is irrational and then the question arises: Should we have it at all?
Student: Or rather, should we claim for it the status of expertise, a status which is
claimed by these other arts?

423
LS: All right, let us make a distinction between expertise-rationality and another form of
rationality. That might be necessary. But even that cannot be properly done if we do not
have a clear understanding of the more accessible case, the shoemaker’s case. The
shoemaker, that is easy to understand. The principle is extremely . . .
Student: It may be true that it is accessible for this reason, but it may be true that even
though it is accessible to a limited extent because one can use this sort of analogy, it does
not follow that by use of this analogy one can know what the end is properly.
LS: But we are guided. The analogy that tells us that you have an end, that you have to
have materials, that you have to have certain human activities by virtue of which the
material is transformed—as you can say that men are transformed by education, for
example—these crucial points would apply to any rational action. That the case of the
political art is infinitely more complex and difficult and that one cannot exactly justify
but [can only] excuse those who give up because of the complexity, that is granted. Now
will you go on reading where we left off.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Well, then, can you declare that we need zeal in discerning both the object itself
as a whole and the forms it assumes?
[Clin.:] Illustrate what you mean by “the forms” you speak of.
[Ath.:] For example, when we said that there are four forms of virtue, obviously, since
there are four, we must assert that each is a separate one.
[Clin.:] Certainly.
[Ath.:] And yet we call them all by one name: we assert that courage is virtue, and
wisdom virtue, and the other two likewise, as though they were really not a plurality, but
solely this one thing—virtue.
[Clin.:] Very true.
[Ath.:] Now it is not hard to explain wherein these two (and the rest) differ from one
another, and how they have got two names; but to explain why we have given the one
name “virtue” to both of them (and to the rest) is no longer an easy matter.
[Clin.:] How do you mean?
[Ath.:] It is not hard to make clear my meaning. Let one of us adopt the role of
questioner, the other of answerer.
[Clin.:] In what way?
[Ath.:] Do you ask me this question— (963c-e)
LS: Let us stop here. At any rate, you see the connection. Of course nothing comes out of
that proposal that Clinias should be the questioner, as you can see from the sequel. The
Athenian, of course, remains the questioner, that is clear. That is only the counterfoil to
this short passage where Clinias was really in control. You remember 963a? Clinias is a
very able man, but in the moment the political dimension is transcended or when we
reach the border, then he is out of his element. Now what is the precise difficulty here
which he cannot handle at all? We have four virtues. Each is a virtue. We say each is a
virtue, and yet we also say virtue is one. If someone is lacking one of the virtues, he is no
longer virtuous. How can we understand that? Now can each part be a whole, and yet it is
only a part? For Plato, that is the deepest question, applying not only to the virtues but to

424
everything, that the whole consists of parts which are themselves wholes. For example, a
part, e.g., a lion; and yet the species is a very well-circumscribed whole. Then you take
the individual lion; it is a part of the species, but clearly it is a whole in itself. You reach a
certain flooring. and that is the thing or being in itself, the parts of which can no longer be
said to be wholes in the way in which the whole is. For example, the stomach is not able
to live in the way the lion is able15 to live. This question is absolutely beyond the
possibilities of Clinias.
But let us look at a few more passages to indicate what Plato is driving at. In 964b8, page
551.
Reader:
[Ath.:] In regard to these matters, is it not right that the interpreters, the teachers, the
lawgivers, as the wardens of the rest, in dealing with him that requires knowledge and
information, or with him that requires punishment and reproof for his sin, should excel all
others in the art of instructing him in the quality of vice and virtue and exhibiting it fully?
Or is some poet who comes into the State, or one who calls himself a trainer of youth, to
be accounted evidently superior to him that has won prizes for all the virtues? (964b-c)
LS: You see, this alternative is very interesting. If we have the legislators as they are in
existence ordinarily, they are defective. They do not understand the fundamental
questions. And then we couldn’t blame people who fall for poets who say, “We go
beyond that.” And even for sophists, because these men who claim to be trainers of the
young—that’s exactly the sophists—are superior to the ordinary legislators. They are
aware of something beyond that. In the speech after the next of the Athenian, 964e,
beginning, will you read that?
Reader:
[Ath.:] Evidently we are comparing the State itself to the skull—
LS: There is a remark of England here. England says, and that makes sense, the state as a
whole is compared to the trunk of a human body. xii “Skull” is one possible translation of
the word; it can as well be “trunk,” the trunk of the human body. More literally
translated, “the city itself”—he doesn’t say “the whole city”—is “that trunk.” That means
the head is beyond the city, and what is in the head. Does this very remarkable passage
remind you of something which you may remember in the Republic? In the Republic the
city of the pigs, the city without any virtue, is called the true city or the city. I believe this
is a parallel to that. The intellectual element, the intellectual life especially, is beyond the
polis. And the whole problem is indicated by such a formulation. Without the mind, it is
like a body without the head. So it needs it, obviously. And yet on the other hand, it must
also be protected against that. That creates also a difficulty for the polis. It is the same
problem we have been discussing throughout this course.
There are two more passages. In 965d 5 to 6 (page 557) there is something.
xii

The Laws of Plato, ed. Edwin Bourdieu England, vol. 2, 625.

425
Reader:
[Ath.:] This element, my friends, we must now (if we please) hold very tight, and not let
go until we have adequately explained the essential nature of the object to be aimed at—
whether, that is, it exists by nature as a unity, or as a whole, or as both, or in some other
way. (965d)
LS: That is really the last question of Plato, the ultimate question. Is the highest peak of
learning, as he calls it in the Republic, to be understood as one, or as a whole? “One”
would mean here something in distinction to the whole, something which does not consist
of any parts; the whole consists of parts. Or is it both? Is it in one way without a seam, 16
[and] in the other way consisting of parts? That is the problem of the idea of the good.
We find another allusion to that a bit later in 966a, the second speech of the Athenian.
Reader:
[Ath.:] Very well, then; do we hold the same view about the fair and the good? Ought our
wardens to know only that each of these is a plurality, or ought they also to know how
and wherein they are each a unity?
LS: Yes, each of them. They are distinguished from each other. The distinction between
the fair or the noble, and the good is crucial. The question, the problem of the idea of the
good, as he calls it in the Republic, implies that the good is higher than the fair or noble.
Now the answer of Clinias.
Reader:
[Clin.:] It is fairly obvious that they must necessarily also discern how these are a unity.
(966a)
LS: Which could be understood to mean that he is trying to equate them simply, and that
would of course from Plato’s point of view mean the abandonment of the fundamental
problem. This simple question of the relation of the fair and the good is truly the
fundamental question, especially morally, because, as I have said more than once, the
moral on the highest level is the fair and the noble. The good is higher than that, beyond
that. One could use, not entirely wrongly, the Nietzschean formula “beyond good and
evil” in the moral sense of the term. You know what Nietzsche means by beyond good
and evil was of course beyond morally good and morally evil, not simply beyond good
and evil. That is the question. Plato defines the eros in the Banquet—and it is popularly
understood, as we all know—as love for the beautiful. Young people who love a girl love
her as beautiful; even if she is objectively not beautiful, they see her as beautiful. Plato
develops it very nicely, how snub noses and other things appear particularly attractive.
You know these things, probably from the literature on the subject. Now what Plato says
in the Banquet is that this is wrong. Eros does not tend toward the beautiful—beautiful,
fair, noble in Greek is the same word—but the good. The relevance and significance of
the noble, or the fair, can be understood only by virtue of its relation to its principle, the
good itself.

426
We have to leave it at this point. The amazing thing which Plato does in these last few
pages is to indicate the fundamental problems of his whole philosophy, and in a way
which is verbally intelligible to Clinias, of course. Verbally. He talks, as it were, above
Clinias’s head to the young generation, or to some people in the young generation a
hundred years in advance who, when reading that book, will understand more of it. That
is a question which was raised very reasonably in today’s report, namely: To what extent
will the other Platonic dialogues be permitted? I suppose the nocturnal council would
insist on having a few copies strictly closeted for the proper members who, when they
tried to understand this prelude to the code, would feel it necessary also to read the
Republic, the Banquet and so on.
1

Deleted “the.”
Deleted “it.”
3
Moved “heavier.”
4
Moved “lighter.”
5
Deleted “was.”
6
Deleted “do.”
7
Deleted “as.”
8
Deleted “that is.”
9
Deleted “with.”
10
Moved “that.”
11
Deleted “speaks.”
12
Deleted “that.”
13
Deleted “it.”
14
Deleted “the.”
15
Changed from “capable to live in the way the lion is capable.”
16
Deleted “or.”
2

427

