eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
1
	
	
	
 
Socrates’ Erotic Education   
1
Plato’s Socrates—the Socrates to whom I’ll refer throughout this paper— is famous for 
saying something he never quite says, that he “knows he knows nothing.” He’s less well 
known for a claim that he makes or alludes to in at least five of Plato’s 35 dialogues (Sym 
177d; Theages 128b, 130d-e; Phaedrus 257a; Lysis 204b-c, 205a, 210e; Theaetetus 
150b-151d), that he has knowledge of one thing only: the “erotic things.”  As he puts it in 
the Symposium: “I assert that I have knowledge of nothing…but the erotic things” (177d).  
And in the Theages he goes further: “Surely I always say,” he says, “that I happen to 
know nothing, so to speak, except one small subject: the erotic things.  But in this 
subject,” he adds, “I am wondrously clever beyond any human being who has ever lived 
or is now living” (128b).  And as for Eros being a “small subject,” Plato devotes two long 
dialogues to it (the Symposium and Phaedrus), he uses a form of the word Eros as the 
title of a third (the Lovers), and it’s an important sub-theme in many others, including the 
Republic, Laws, Gorgias, Charmides, and Alcibiades I.  
In this paper, I will give a rough sketch of three things: (1) how Socrates came to 
study Eros (the Greek word for love or the god of love), (2) what he learned from this 
study, and (3) how the study transformed him from an immature natural scientist into the 
mature Socrates, the political philosopher we encounter in the Apology and most of the 
Platonic dialogues.  The story of how Socrates became a political philosopher—his 
famous "turn" or “turns” that led him to the political things—is told in a fragmentary and 
 I’m indebted to Robert Goldberg for his helpful criticisms of an earlier version of this 
1
paper.

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
2
	
	
	
 
playful manner over the course of several dialogues: the Phaedo, Parmenides, 
Symposium, and Apology.  I will connect a few of the fragments in an unorthodox way in 
an effort to show that Plato presents a coherent account of Socrates’ own education.  At 
many points my own understanding of the issues is inadequate, and so for that reason, 
among others, what I say will be very crude.  And it’ll be a while until Eros itself 
becomes part of the story.   
(1) We hear about the earliest stages of Socrates’ theoretical life in the Phaedo, where 
Socrates, on the day of his death, discusses what he was like when young—meaning, I 
think, still a teenager.   Let me do some reading and paraphrasing of the Phaedo and offer 
a few interpretive suggestions along the way.  At 96a ff. he gives a brief intellectual 
autobiography. It starts like this: “For…as a young man I was wondrously desirous 
of that wisdom they call 'inquiry concerning nature.'  This wisdom seemed to me 
splendid (ὑπερήφανος)—to know the causes of each thing, why each thing comes to 
be, and why it perishes, and why it is.” Socrates apparently traces the wondrousness of 
his desire for the wisdom of natural science to the fact that it seemed to him splendid to 
know the causes of each thing.  That is, he was drawn to philosophy at least partly by the 
seeming nobility of the wisdom it seeks.  One might say that he was, to this extent, under 
the spell of the noble or the beautiful—it’s the same word in Greek (τὸ καλόν) —which 
isn’t to say that the only reason he sought wisdom was its seeming nobility.—Notice, by 
the way, that he doesn't say that the desire for such wisdom ever left him.  And in the 
Theaetetus and elsewhere, Plato shows us that he in fact maintained an interest in 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
3
	
	
	
 
scientific knowledge—astronomy and the like—until the end of his life (Tht 145c-d).  
Whether his desire remained “wondrous” is a subject I’ll return to.  Notice too that at this 
stage he seemed to think it might be possible "to know the causes of each thing," i.e., to 
acquire comprehensive knowledge of the whole.   
2
	
(1.a) Two things are striking about Socrates’ first list of the questions he sought to 
answer.  To begin with, the sequence is peculiar: he desired to know, he says, why each 
thing comes into being, why it perishes, and why it is.  He ignores the natural order of the 
topics and puts perishing in the middle—the position of greatest importance in Platonic 
lists with odd numbers of items.  Why does he do this?  Perhaps it’s merely because 
perishing—death—happens to be the subject of the conversation in the Phaedo.  But 
perhaps it’s also because death was the subject most on the young Socrates’ mind.  In 
other words, concern about death as well as concern for nobility may have been among 
the things that first drew Socrates to natural science or philosophy.  As we’ll see later, the 
two concerns are linked.  Second, Socrates’ questions presuppose that everything does in 
fact perish.  He doesn't ask whether some things perish and others don't; instead, he takes 
for granted that everything perishes—except the material elements (96b)  and the 
3
mindless elemental forces (99b-d) that he first considers as causes—and asks why?  One 
implication is that Socrates, at this time, did not take seriously the possibility of immortal 
 ὑπερήφανος—which can mean either “magnificent/splendid” or "overweening" (with 
2
implications of hubris/impiety)—is a key term in Alcibiades’ praise and indictment of 
Socrates in the Symposium.  (217e, 219c). 
 But cf. 96b5: “brain.”
3

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
4
	
	
	
 
gods or immortal souls.  He was apparently a dogmatic atheist, a sophisticated kid who 
rejected religious claims out of hand.   
	
(1.b) But this, of course, doesn't mean that he was unaware of such claims.  He 
began, he says, by investigating questions like why living beings (96b1) and human 
thoughtfulness (96b4) and knowledge (96b8) come into being, and then he turned to 
investigating why they perish (96b8).  Without explanation, he couples this second 
investigation—of perishing—with his investigation of “the things that happen concerning 
heaven and earth” (96b).  Perhaps the connection is this: In the Apology Socrates says 
that those who investigate the things aloft and under the earth—and investigating matters 
“concerning…the earth” might well entail investigating what’s under it—are held “not to 
believe in gods” (18b-c).  Maybe he thought that by giving a completely natural account 
of why we (and our minds or souls) must perish—an account based on material and 
efficient causation—he'd refute the pious account of the heavenly gods and of Hades, the 
supposed realm of the dead.  If so, prudence might very well have kept Plato’s Socrates 
from explaining the connection in the Phaedo.  In any case, his efforts to find such an 
account failed, for reasons I’ll come back to soon.  But there's no sign that this failure 
immediately led him to take religious claims more seriously.  
	
(1.c) Around this time, however, he did become interested in a kind of god, or at 
least in something I’d call godlike.  He says: “Once, though, I heard somebody reading 
from a book he said was by Anaxagoras and which said that it is in fact Mind that 
orders and causes all things.  Now I was pleased with this sort of cause…And I 
considered that if this is the case, then Mind...would order all things…in just the 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
5
	
	
	
 
way that was best.  So if somebody should want to discover the cause concerning 
each thing—in what way it comes into being or perishes or is—he’d have to 
discover…in what way it’s best for it either to be or to suffer or to do anything 
whatsoever....  And if [Anaxagoras] could make these things evident to me, I was 
prepared to cease longing for any other kind of cause” (97b-98a).   If Anaxagoras 
could show that the world was ruled by a godlike mind that arranged everything for the 
best—meaning, as Socrates goes on to say, best both for each thing and for the common 
good of all things (98a-b)—Socrates’ only partly theoretical longings or “hopes,” as he 
also refers to them (98b), would be satisfied.  That is, he’s hoping, in part, to be shown 
that it's good for him that he must die.  It's noteworthy that Socrates doesn't seem to 
entertain the possibility that the ruling mind might grant him immortality: Hades and the 
like still strike him as nonsense.  Nevertheless, his hopes or “wondrous hope” (98b7), as 
he also calls it—recalling his “wondrous desire” for the wisdom sought by natural 
science (96a6)—has what could be called a religious cast.  To put it loosely, he hoped that 
Anaxagorean Mind would be the answer to his unuttered prayers.    
4
	
	
(1.c.2) Unfortunately, his hopes were dashed.  Anaxagoras, he says, didn’t 
really treat Mind as a cause at all, but instead spoke of “air and ether and water” and 
other things of that kind (98b-c).  Yet since, as Socrates admits, he read Anaxagoras very 
quickly—not very closely—his criticisms are perhaps unfair.  And understood differently, 
 Notice the doubling of terms at 97d4: ἄριστον καὶ τὸ βέλτιστον.  I’ll discuss the 
4
significance of this later. 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
6
	
	
	
 
the view that Mind is the cause—or rather a cause—of all things might be quite sensible.  
It is, I think, the mature Socrates' own view.   
In any case, Socrates was dissatisfied with earlier approaches to causality—the 
effort to explain everything either in terms of material elements and blind forces or in 
terms of a ruling mind.  He was dissatisfied with material and efficient causality in part 
because it couldn't account for human thought or knowledge; it couldn’t even explain 
how one and one make two: Is it through a pair of ones being put together that two comes 
into being? Or is it the opposite, the splitting of a one that causes two to come into being 
(96e-97b)?  Or is neither a sufficient cause?  Perhaps two’s coming into being is caused 
partly by a mind thinking of two ones together, as a whole—a “two.”  And to apply this 
more generally, Socrates was dissatisfied with material and efficient causality in part 
because, in trying to understand things as nothing more than compounds of their most 
basic elements, or as temporary combinations of elements brought together and then 
separated by elemental forces or motions, it proved unable to account for wholes: bones, 
for example, or dogs, or human beings—or more broadly, for what has been called noetic 
heterogeneity.  Moreover, Socrates expresses doubt that natural scientists will ever find 
the most basic elements, forces, and motions that, unlike their compounds, are 
“deathless” and known to be deathless.  To use his words, he doubts that they’ll ever find 
the “stronger and more deathless Atlas” they’re looking for (99c3-4).  And how could 
they?  How could they ever be certain, for example, that the most basic elements didn’t 
come into being out of something else, or perhaps out of nothing, and might one day 
transmute into something else or simply perish?  To turn now to ruling mind, perhaps he 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
7
	
	
	
 
was dissatisfied with it, in part, because it couldn’t explain why it’s good for us that we 
must die.  Also, by speaking, on the one hand, of what’s best for each and, on the other, of 
“the common good of all,” he invites us to wonder whether the two always coincide.  In 
the Phaedo, the mature Socrates quietly points to one aspect of the problem: doing what 
serves the so-called common good may sometimes be “more just” and “nobler” for the 
individual (cf. 98e3-4: “better…and more just” with 99a2-3: “more just…and nobler”).  
But whether it’s also “better” for the individual isn’t clear.  I’ll return to this subject later.  
For now, back to the young Socrates.   
	
His early longings and hopes were disappointed.  His failure, in particular, to 
learn from another or to discover for himself an argument for ruling mind left him feeling 
“robbed— ἐστερήθην,” as if, because his pursuit of wisdom was noble, he were owed that 
kind of account of causality (99c8).  But even though his longings and wondrous hope 
were disappointed, there was a compensating gain in self-knowledge, including a greater 
awareness—though not, I think, complete awareness—of what his longings and hopes 
were.  But whatever the compensations, Socrates’ early investigations led to what I’ll call 
the first crisis in his theoretical life—a crisis concerning causality.  
He began to resolve this crisis, he tells us in the Phaedo, by his turn to the 
“ideas.”  What he means by the “ideas” or “forms” goes far beyond the scope of this talk.  
But let me offer this much as a brief, crude, and unsupported summary: Socrates 
recognized that “to be” always means to be something, to be a kind of thing, to belong to 
a class of things.  And the class-character or idea of each being is a cause of that being—
a cause of its being what it is (a dog, say, and not a cat).  But the ideas are not the 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
8
	
	
	
 
complete cause of any being.  (The “idea” of the dog, for example, doesn’t produce the 
“matter” of the dog, or cause some pre-existing matter to fly together and take the shape 
of a dog.)  To half-borrow language from the Republic (cf. 516c), the ideas are “a cause”
—a necessary but not a sufficient cause—of the perceptible beings—the beings we see, 
hear, and touch.  And while Socrates’ turn to the ideas, or discovery of formal causes, was 
a great advance in his understanding, it was accompanied by a recognition that 
comprehensive knowledge of the whole would forever be beyond the reach of natural 
science, in part, but only in part, because of something I mentioned earlier—that natural 
science can never be certain whether “matter” came into being or might one day perish.    
5
(2) We hear about Socrates' turn to the ideas in the Phaedo, and we see him after he's 
made the turn in the Parmenides, set during the quadrennial Great Panathenaea at a time 
when, the dialogue’s narrator says, Socrates was still "exceedingly young"(σφόδρα 
νέον) (127c). Scholars somehow know that the Great Panathenaea was once held in 450 
BC, when Socrates was 19, and this—or perhaps 454, when Socrates was a mere 15—is, 
I think, the dramatic date of the dialogue.  (By 446 Socrates was 23, and while that’s 
young, it isn’t "exceedingly young.") 
	
(2.a) In the Parmenides, Socrates is presented as believing in separate ideas—
eternal, self-subsisting beings, separate from the perceptible beings or thoughts, speeches, 
and actions that somehow participate in them (130b; but cf. 132b).  He’s confident that 
there are separate ideas of justice, nobility, and goodness; he wavers on whether there are 
separate ideas of human being, fire, and water; and he's inclined to think that it's 
 Among other things, Socrates’ approach still can’t explain thought, and perhaps can’t 
5
explain the precise relation of form and matter.

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
9
	
	
	
 
ridiculous to hold that there are separate ideas of lowly things like hair, mud, and dirt 
(130b-d).  To say the least, this is consistent with the possibility that Socrates continues to 
be drawn to wisdom partly by its nobility or splendor.  Parmenides, recognizing that 
Socrates is under the spell of the noble, chides him gently, telling him that he isn't yet 
really a philosopher (however much he may think he is).  "Socrates," he says, "you are 
still young”—notice that he doesn’t say "exceedingly young,” implying, perhaps, that it’s 
time for him to grow up—“Socrates, you are still young and philosophy has not yet laid 
hold of you as I think it one day will.  You will one day despise none of these things.  But 
now, because of your youth, you still pay regard to the opinions of human beings" (130e; 
cf. 135c).  In particular, says Parmenides, Socrates hasn't yet undergone enough training 
in argument to be able to mark off the boundaries (ὁρίζεσθαι) of the noble, the just, and 
the good (135c).  I think he means in part that the noble and the just, as Socrates 
understands them, improperly bleed into his understanding of the good.  And as for 
"training in argument," he means training in a kind of dialectic: he tells Socrates to 
practice taking a hypothesis and developing all of its implications—to see whether they're 
plausible—and then doing the same with the opposite hypothesis (136a-c; cf. Phaedo 
101d-e).  For evidence that Socrates eventually mastered this training, see, for example, 
his examination of the successive definitions of justice offered in Republic, book 1.   
	
(2.b) While most of what Parmenides says about Socrates is true—in the view, I 
think, of the mature Socrates himself—he gets one important thing wrong.  As we'll see, 
the mature Socrates thinks it's of the utmost importance to continue "paying regard to the 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
10
	
	
	
 
opinions of human beings"—though not in the way he did when he was still very young 
and a slave to some of those opinions.  
	
(2.c) A last point on the Parmenides: as far as I can see, Socrates, having given up 
on Anaxagorean Mind, has lapsed back into dogmatic atheism.  He displays no interest in 
examining the question of the gods, although he’s willing to speak as if he believes in a 
“god” or in “gods” (134b-e).  Perhaps Parmenides, who raises the question of whether the 
gods alone could have precise knowledge of the idea of the beautiful, the idea of the 
good, and the like, is encouraging Socrates to take the question of the gods more 
seriously.    
(3) When we next hear about Socrates, it's perhaps 440 BC, he's about 30 (see Sym 201d), 
and as he tells the party-goers in the Symposium, he goes to Diotima—an apparently 
fictional character he uses as a dramatic device—for an education in Eros.  (In other 
words, as I understand it, his story of his education at the hands of Diotima is his playful 
way of describing a portion of his self-education.  Why he attributes this education to a 
foreign priestess, whose name means honored by Zeus or honorer of Zeus, and who 
comes from a town (Mantineia) that sounds a lot like the Greek for “divination” 
(mantike), I’m not sure.  Perhaps it’s because the surface of her teaching, with its 
emphasis on procreation and account of the daimonic realm—the realm connecting gods 
and human beings (Sym 202d-203a)—comes not unfittingly from the mouth of such a 
woman.  In any case, it takes (and here I’m guessing, based partly on a statement at Rep 
539e)—maybe 5 years—that is, until about 435 BC, when Socrates is about 35—for what 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
11
	
	
	
 
I’ll call the first two parts of his erotic education to be completed, or to sink in fully.  I'll 
say more about the significance of this date later.  A third part of his erotic education 
continues until the end of his life.   Two related things, corresponding to what I called the 
6
first two parts of his erotic education, prepare the way for his turn to the study of Eros.  
Together they constitute what I’ll call Socrates’ second crisis—a crisis that is both 
theoretical and practical, and by practical I mean a crisis in which he rethinks the most 
fundamental practical question of all: how should I live?  Or to put it less formally, “what 
the hell am I doing with my life, and what should I be doing?”—So on to the two 
interrelated elements: 
	
(3.a) First, he has become perplexed about his own love of the noble or the 
beautiful.  At 206b, Diotima asks Socrates: “Since eros is always this—by which she 
means the desire to possess the good eternally—since eros is always this, in what 
way of pursuing it, and in what action, would the seriousness and straining [of the 
pursuers] be called love? … Can you say, [Socrates]?”  To which Socrates replies in 
frustration: “If I could, Diotima, I would not, in admiration of your wisdom, keep 
coming to you to learn these very things."  Now, I think that Socrates supposes he 
knows perfectly well what the erotic ones—the lovers of the noble or beautiful (201e, 
204d, etc.)—are doing: gazing into each other's eyes, making love, perhaps pursuing 
 I'm assuming that Socrates’ efforts to confirm, through refutations, his insight into the 
6
roots of seeming religious experience are part of his on-going erotic education.  Cf. Ap 
23b with Thg 128b: although there are others who possess human wisdom—which at 
least in some cases (e.g. the Eleatic Stranger) includes genuine insight into the roots of 
seeming religious experience—Socrates surpasses everyone who has ever lived in his 
understanding of "the erotic things," in part, or perhaps in whole, because he is the first to 
recognize the necessity and possibility of confirming this insight.  I will return to this 
later.

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
12
	
	
	
 
wisdom partly because it’s “among the noblest things” (204b, but cf. 205d).   The reason 
he can’t answer her question may be that he isn’t sure how these activities are ways of 
seeking one’s own eternal good (204c7-8).  To put it another way, Socrates has become 
perplexed about his motivation: He was erotically drawn both to beautiful boys and to the 
“splendor” or nobility of philosophic wisdom (211d, cf. 204b with Phaedo 96a).  But he 
has begun to wonder how such erotic pursuits are good for the pursuer, if indeed they are 
good.  What in the world is the good we’re striving for when we’re driven by our love of 
the noble or beautiful?  Socrates says explicitly that this is a question that led him to 
Diotima (206b; cf. 204c-e, 207c).  (In other words, he has begun to take seriously part of 
Parmenides’ gentle chastisement.)  But there was another question that led him to her as 
well, one that it wouldn’t have been prudent for him to state explicitly.…Today, however, 
things have changed: the pious atmosphere of ancient Athens is gone, and perhaps we’d 
benefit from its partial resuscitation.  So let me be explicit for him. 
	
(3.b) The second issue (or part of his crisis) is that Soc has become dissatisfied 
with his dogmatic atheism.  (Perhaps his encounter with Parmenides played a role here 
too.)  He has begun to be bothered by the fact—which he must have recognized when he 
was still very young and turned to the ideas—that so-called natural science will never be 
comprehensive enough to rule out the possibility of miraculous gods, gods whose 
existence would be incompatible with nature and hence, of course, with natural science or 
philosophy in the strict sense.  Let me spell this out: natural science or philosophy 
presupposes the existence of nature, that is, of a fundamental necessity that limits what is 
possible.  It presupposes that all choice takes place within these limits.  And this applies 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
13
	
	
	
 
to divine choice as well as human.  For if gods can alter things however they please, 
nature doesn't exist, and what's called nature is merely the arrangement that persists until 
they decide to change it.  In other words, if there are miraculous gods, natural science or 
philosophy—understood as knowledge of the necessary character of things—is 
impossible, because there is no necessary character of things.  But while Socrates has 
long been aware that so-called natural science can’t rule out the possibility of such gods, 
he doesn’t seem to have taken the problem seriously.  He seems to have regarded claims 
about the gods as something like a claim that there are invisible magical elves wandering 
the woods near Kenyon College.  If anyone made such a claim—and at Kenyon, anything 
is possible—we couldn’t disprove it…but neither would we be bothered by it—we simply 
wouldn’t take it seriously. 
	
Perhaps what, at long last, made the otherwise bare, theoretical possibility of 
miraculous gods so unsettling to Socrates is that he had begun to wonder whether 
evidence of such gods might not be found in his own erotic experience—his experience of 
the noble or beautiful—once that experience ceased to be viewed through the lens of 
dogmatic atheism.  I take this to be the serious meaning of his statement to Diotima at 
202b that everyone agrees that Eros is a god.  We learn a few details about the romantic 
side of Socrates’ erotic experience from statements at Symposium 211d and 206a: The 
sight of beautiful boys left him feeling thunderstruck and induced a limited self-
forgetting.  In looking at the beautiful ones, he was almost prepared to stop eating and 
drinking and let himself wither away.  Yet at the same time, it seems to have awakened in 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
14
	
	
	
 
him a longing for, and even a strange hope of, complete happiness, including immortality 
(cf. 211d with 206a). 
Let me elaborate: Anyone who has ever fallen in love knows that a lover feels 
utterly transformed.  He sometimes looks at himself and wonders: "What in the world has 
happened to me?  I'm not the same person I was yesterday!"  His old concerns suddenly 
seem trivial; and new, unanticipated things arise in him, including seemingly 
contradictory things.  On the one hand, for example, he's filled with thoughts of devotion 
(including a willingness to die for his beloved: a big theme in Phaedrus’ speech in the 
Symposium); on the other, he feels a longing to be joined with his beloved forever, and 
even a hope—at least a half-conscious hope—that such immortal union might somehow 
be possible: a subtheme in Aristophanes speech in the Symposium (cf. 211d, 206a, 192d-
e, 179b).  The thought of sacrifice for love and the hope or divination that love is 
somehow the promise of complete happiness (including immortality) come flooding into 
the soul almost simultaneously.  Where do these strange thoughts and hopes come from?  
It isn't obvious that they simply arise from our “natures,” our psychological needs.  On 
the contrary, they're so alien to what our "natures" had seemed to be until then that lovers 
sometimes don't even recognize themselves: they feel reborn. But how is such rebirth 
possible?  What wipes away our old "nature" and replaces it with something new?  
Maybe, just maybe, the answer is that we've been touched by a power divine. And maybe 
it's divine encouragement or the divine call that generates and fosters our new hopes.  At 
any rate, both onlookers and the lover himself sometimes see him as a man 
"possessed"—as a man who, to use Phaedrus's expression, has "a god within him" (180b).  

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
15
	
	
	
 
This helps to explain why the Symposium is devoted to the seemingly bizarre question of 
whether Eros is a god and why the roughly thirty-year-old Socrates thought that the 
answer just might be “yes,” or at least that he couldn’t with sufficient confidence say “no” 
(202b).  
I’d like to step back from the text for a minute and talk more broadly about the 
seeming evidence that god or gods might exist.  Socrates, I think, came to recognize that 
the hopefulness accompanying love of the noble or beautiful could seem to be an 
experience of divine encouragement—“something out there smiles upon noble men like 
me”—or of the Divine Call.  Maybe such "weak" divine experience—and by "weak" I 
mean to distinguish it from direct revelation: God talking to Moses from the burning 
bush, for example—maybe such "weak" divine experience is inseparable not only from 
ordinary love but from morality, and hence is nearly universal.  It is present, for example, 
in the rush of hopefulness or sense of promise that accompanies the performance of a 
noble deed, in the foreboding that accompanies the experience of guilt, in conscience 
experienced as a voice within or as someone watching, and in anger, which can make us 
feel like instruments or agents of super-human righteousness and which (despite its 
painful side) fills us with a strange and pleasant hopefulness.  If we didn't live in such an 
irreligious age, it might not be so hard to recognize that we are all filled with seeming 
evidence of the gods’ existence. 
	
(3.c) Now back to Socrates.  Uncertain whether philosophy is possible, and 
confused about his own erotic motivation—including his partly erotic motive for 
philosophizing—Socrates turns to a study of Eros, which, as we'll later see, could also be 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
16
	
	
	
 
called a turn to the study of the noble or to political philosophy.  Diotima is presented as 
his teacher.  What does he learn from her?  And how does it help him deal with his two-
fold crisis?  Here I’ll have to paint in very broad strokes, in part because when we reach 
the high point of the discussion—Diotima’s famous ladder of love speech—she offers 
poetic images but almost no concrete details and no supporting arguments whatsoever.  
Also, as I understand it, she presents one teaching in the foreground and another in the 
background that is in some ways the opposite.  But the background teaching is merely 
indicated or pointed to, not spelled out.   
	
Let me explain.  Eros, she all but says, is not a god but a human desire or longing, 
and one first gets the impression—this is what I meant by the foreground—that it finds its 
ultimate fulfillment in a mystical-sounding vision of “the beautiful itself.”  Her words 
are: “It is here in life, if anywhere, my dear Socrates…that life is worth living for a 
human being: beholding [or, as one could also translate it, ‘seeing clearly’  (θεωµένῳ)] 
the beautiful itself” (211c-d).  To simplify, when cultivated properly, she teaches, eros has 
a trajectory; it begins in love of beautiful human bodies, moves on to love of beautiful 
souls, and after a couple more steps, it, or what follows on it, culminates in an all-
fulfilling vision of the beautiful itself.   If this sounds somewhat fantastic, it isn’t 
7
surprising, because it turns out that her conclusion depends grammatically on the word 
“be imagined” or perhaps “be fantasized” (φαντασθήσεται) (211a; see Dover’s note on 
211a5).  What she actually says is that the beautiful “will be imagined” as “alone by 
itself, with itself, always being of a single form” (211a-b).  And when she speaks almost 
7 Oddly, she gives two somewhat different accounts of the ascent: cf. 210a-211b with 
211c-d.  The second is silent about soul.

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
17
	
	
	
 
immediately afterwards of “beholding the beautiful itself,” she seems to mean beholding 
it in one’s imagination (211d2-3).  At any rate, she says nothing in between to lead us to 
think otherwise.  And when a few lines later she speaks of someone who “glimpse[s] the 
divinely beautiful itself…and beholds it with that with which it is necessary [to behold 
it]”—a conspicuously vague locution—she is apparently referring once again to the 
imagination, and not, say, to the intellect (211e-212a; cf. Dover on 212a1-2).  To put all 
this another way, one could say that a man who beholds the beautiful itself only in his 
imagination is a man who only imagines that he beholds the beautiful itself.   
	
This disconcerting textual observation about the role attributed to imagination fits 
with a number of other oddities in Diotima’s speech.  Let me mention three.  First, when 
discussing the desire for happiness, Diotima speaks in passing of eros as “deceptive for 
everyone” or “all-beguiling” (205d1-2).  Kenneth Dover, who edited a fine Greek edition 
of the Symposium, offers a beautiful illustration of a tendency of a certain school of 
Platonic scholarship: He warns the reader not to pay any attention to these words!  But 
Diotima herself goes on to suggest that romantic lovers, poets, and statesmen may be 
misled by eros to expect an impossible immortality (cf. 209d-e with 208e4: “as they 
suppose”).  Second, Diotima says that in climbing the ladder of love we grow "stronger" 
and endure many "toils" or "pains” (210d-e; cf. Rep 535d).  But if the lover is moving 
from things that are lovely to things that are even lovelier until he reaches the thing that is 
loveliest of all, it’s unclear why strength is needed or why the process is toilsome or 
painful.  Third, Diotima doesn’t say that “the beautiful itself” is an object of eros: it is 
“beheld” but not loved—evidently because it isn’t lovable (211d, 212a).  Even on the 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
18
	
	
	
 
surface of her teaching, eros has a trajectory that leads beyond itself.  The lover who 
cultivates his eros properly ends up, it seems, a lover no more. 
	
This is all very baffling.  Fortunately, there may be another way of understanding 
Diotima’s speech in which the seemingly incongruous parts fit together.  Let me offer 
some suggestions, suggestions about what I called her “background teaching.”  Just 
before speaking of the one-time lover achieving a mystical vision of the beautiful itself, 
Diotima spoke more soberly of someone whose erotic trajectory has led him to a “science 
(or knowledge)” of a certain sort of beauty (210d7-e1), which turns out to be the 
“beautiful itself” —in other words, a science that leads to seeing the “beautiful itself” 
clearly, understood as seeing the truth about the beautiful—which may be a beautiful 
truth, an ugly truth, or something in-between or other (210c-e).  But how does one 
acquire this knowledge?  Plato’s Diotima points to the answer in her poetic description of 
“the beautiful itself” as “in the first place, always being and neither coming to be or 
perishing…and in the second place, not beautiful in one respect and ugly in another, 
nor sometimes beautiful and sometimes not…nor beautiful here and ugly there, as 
being beautiful to some and ugly to others” (210e-211a).  This language is similar to 
the language that Socrates uses in the Phaedo and Republic when giving his own poetic 
presentation of the ideas—including “the idea of the just” and “the idea of the beautiful 
[or noble]”—as eternal, self-subsistent beings (Phaedo 78d).  But as Socrates begins to 
show in Republic book 1 and says towards the end of book 7 (see especially 537e-539d), 
the way to find the truth about the just and the noble isn’t to gaze off to a superhuman 
realm where the perfect and unchangeable ideas make their home, but through dialectic

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
19
	
	
	
 
—i.e., by thinking through common opinions about justice and nobility, seeing what 
contradictions arise, and ascending to a noncontradictory understanding (cf. Phaedo 
101d-e).  (You can find the beginning of such a dialectical examination in the Laches 
section of the Laches, where, among other things, the nobility of a certain kind of courage 
is discussed (esp. 192b-194b).)  Carrying out this inquiry could indeed require strength—
or toughening up—and endurance of pain, in part because the truth may, in some 
respects, fall short of our wondrous hopes, and learning it may sometimes mean freeing 
ourselves from eros’ delightful…deceptions.  In the language of the Republic, dialectic 
brings about a “turning around of the soul,” enabling us to escape from “the cave,” a life 
of enslavement to the common opinions found in every city or political community and to 
the passions dependent on, or inseparable from, these opinions (531d-533e along with 
514a-517c and 518a, 519b, 521c, 525a, 525c, 526e, 532b, 533c-d).  In her ladder of love 
speech, Diotima too speaks of a fundamental “turn,” though, displaying the delicacy of a 
priestess, she doesn’t emphasize it as Socrates does in the Republic (210d).  Climbing the 
Symposium’s ladder of love, I think, is the same as escaping from the Republic’s cave.  
They are two images of the same thing—genuine education—viewed from different 
angles. 
	
As I said before, Socrates began spending time with Diotima around 440 BC, and 
it took perhaps 5 years—that is, until about 435 BC, when he was about 35—for him to 
fully understand and digest her dialectical-psychological teaching.  By the end, he was no 
longer tempted to regard his own erotic experiences as divine; he was no longer confused 
about his own motive for philosophizing—these are what I called the first two parts of his 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
20
	
	
	
 
erotic education—and he may have considered himself wise in the only wisdom that isn’t 
vulgar, according to Diotima—wise in erotic matters of a certain kind (203a).  If I’m 
right, he now possessed “the science of the beautiful,” meaning, in part, he believed he 
knew what in man calls out to god or gods and thinks it hears back (202d-203a).  He may 
have thought that in the things that matter most he was as wise as anyone could be.  This 
would be the moment of the Delphic oracle in the Apology—the moment when, 
according to the playful or ironic Socrates, Apollo’s priestess, speaking for the god, 
declared that no one was wiser than Socrates.  But Socrates wasn’t satisfied with this 
wisdom, in part because, although he had come to understand his own seeming 
experience of god, he of course still lacked knowledge of whether god or gods exist.  And 
how could he be sure that what he had discovered about his own experience applied to the 
experience of others?  How could he, with his merely human wisdom, as he calls it, be 
sure that no one had “superhuman wisdom”—that is, knowledge based on genuine 
experience of god? 
	
(4) We get a partial answer in the Apology itself, where Socrates says that after 
puzzling over the oracle “for a long time”—perhaps three years, that is, until about 432 
BC—he turned “very reluctantly” to an investigation of the oracle or of the god himself 
(the Greek is ambiguous on this point) by cross-examining men and refuting their beliefs 
about allegedly “noble and good” things— including, as we learn from the dialogues, 
justice, law, and nobility itself (21b-c).  His reluctance may have stemmed from his 
awareness that these cross-examinations were sure to bring him trouble (21d, 21e, 
22e-23a).  But he persisted, he says, because “it seemed to be necessary to regard the 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
21
	
	
	
 
matter of the god”—which could mean the matter of the Delphic god’s or any god’s 
existence—“as most important” (21e).  This was the third and last fundamental turn in 
his theoretical life.  It seems that the first such examination was of Alcibiades in about 
432 BC, the dramatic date of the Alcibiades I, when Socrates was perhaps 37.  He was 
now a mature political philosopher, the one who appears in most of the Platonic 
dialogues.  To the end of his days, in addition to philosophizing, he sought to confirm the 
precondition of philosophy—the existence of nature.  He sought to confirm and perhaps 
deepen his human wisdom, his erotic wisdom…his insight into the relation between eros, 
the beautiful or noble things, and belief in, and even seeming experience of, god or gods. 
To judge from the Theages quote I offered at the beginning of this talk—"Surely I always 
say,” he says, “that I happen to know nothing, so to speak, except one small subject: the 
erotic things.  But in this subject I am wondrously clever beyond any human being who 
has ever lived or is now living” (128b)—to judge from this quote, he regarded his efforts 
as tremendously successful.	  
	
Let me conclude by pointing out or reiterating some verbal equivalents in Plato 
and drawing out their implications.  In the Apology Socrates implies that only an 
examined life is worth living (38a).  Diotima implies that only a life with knowledge or 
science of the noble or beautiful is worth living (211d, 210d-e).  Perhaps these are two 
ways of saying the same thing.  Again, Socrates in the Apology says that he possesses 
only human wisdom; elsewhere he claims to be supremely wise in “the erotic things.”  
“Human wisdom,” another name, it seems, for “erotic wisdom,” has at its core the 
“science of the beautiful,” which can also be described, as it is in the Apology, as a 

eros paper/Tom Pangle --4/3/19--3:37 PM		
	
	
	
	
	
	
22
	
	
	
 
certain ignorance of anything “noble and good” (21d).  [Consider: does the “science of 
the beautiful” include understanding the roots of our hopes?] That is, he has discovered 
that neither he nor, as far as he could tell, his untold number of interlocutors know of 
anything fundamentally good for us because it is noble.  With this in mind we can 
perhaps begin to understand his statement in the Phaedo that philosophers practice 
nothing other than “dying and being dead” (64a).  This may seem grim, but in the 
Apology Socrates assures us that the philosophic life, the examined life, is the greatest 
good for a human being (38a), and that the continuation of this life beyond the grave 
would be an “inconceivable happiness,” or more literally, “a happiness that cannot be 
devised [ἀµήχανον],” meaning, perhaps, an “impossible happiness” (41c). Impossible 
happiness, possible happiness: the mature Socrates is confident that he understands both.   
